The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Son at the Front, by Edith Wharton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: A Son at the Front

Author: Edith Wharton

Release Date: May 5, 2019 [EBook #59437]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SON AT THE FRONT ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









 _BY EDITH WHARTON_


 A SON AT THE FRONT
 THE GREATER INCLINATION
 THE TOUCHSTONE
 CRUCIAL INSTANCES
 THE VALLEY OF DECISION
 SANCTUARY
 THE DESCENT OF MAN
 THE HOUSE OF MIRTH
 THE FRUIT OF THE TREE
 THE HERMIT AND THE WILD WOMAN
 TALES OF MEN AND GHOSTS
 ETHAN FROME
 THE CUSTOM OF THE COUNTRY
 XINGU

 IN MOROCCO
 FIGHTING FRANCE
 ITALIAN BACKGROUNDS
 A MOTOR FLIGHT THROUGH FRANCE
 ARTEMIS TO ACTÆON
 THE DECORATION OF HOUSES

 _CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS_




                           A SON AT THE FRONT


                                    BY
                              EDITH WHARTON

 _Something veil’d and abstracted is often a part of the manners of these
                          beings._?WALT WHITMAN


                                 NEW YORK
                         CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS
                                 MCMXXIII




                       COPYRIGHT, 1922, 1923, BY
                        CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS

                Printed in the United States of America

                       Published September, 1923


[Illustration]




                               IN MEMORY

                                   OF

                             RONALD SIMMONS

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 BOOK I




                           A SON AT THE FRONT




                                   I


John Campton, the American portrait-painter, stood in his bare studio in
Montmartre at the end of a summer afternoon contemplating a battered
calendar that hung against the wall.

The calendar marked July 30, 1914.

Campton looked at this date with a gaze of unmixed satisfaction. His
son, his only boy, who was coming from America, must have landed in
England that morning, and after a brief halt in London would join him
the next evening in Paris. To bring the moment nearer, Campton, smiling
at his weakness, tore off the leaf and uncovered the 31. Then, leaning
in the window, he looked out over his untidy scrap of garden at the
silver-grey sea of Paris spreading mistily below him.

A number of visitors had passed through the studio that day. After years
of obscurity Campton had been projected into the light?or perhaps only
into the limelight?by his portrait of his son George, exhibited three
years earlier at the spring show of the French Society of Painters and
Sculptors. The picture seemed to its author to be exactly in the line of
the unnoticed things he had been showing before, though perhaps nearer
to what he was always trying for, because of the exceptional interest of
his subject. But to the public he had appeared to take a new turn; or
perhaps some critic had suddenly found the right phrase for him; or,
that season, people wanted a new painter to talk about. Didn’t he know
by heart all the Paris reasons for success or failure?

The early years of his career had given him ample opportunity to learn
them. Like other young students of his generation, he had come to Paris
with an exaggerated reverence for the few conspicuous figures who made
the old Salons of the ’eighties like bad plays written around a few
stars. If he could get near enough to Beausite, the ruling light of the
galaxy, he thought he might do things not unworthy of that great master;
but Beausite, who had ceased to receive pupils, saw no reason for making
an exception in favour of an obscure youth without a backing. He was not
kind; and on the only occasion when a painting of Campton’s came under
his eye he let fall an epigram which went the round of Paris, but
shocked its victim by its revelation of the great man’s ineptitude.

Campton, if he could have gone on admiring Beausite’s work, would have
forgotten his unkindness and even his critical incapacity; but as the
young painter’s personal convictions developed he discovered that his
idol had none, and that the dazzling _maestria_ still enveloping his
work was only the light from a dead star.

All these things were now nearly thirty years old. Beausite had vanished
from the heavens, and the youth he had sneered at throned there in his
stead. Most of the people who besieged Campton’s studio were the lineal
descendants of those who had echoed Beausite’s sneer. They belonged to
the types that Campton least cared to paint; but they were usually those
who paid the highest prices, and he had lately had new and imperious
reasons for wanting to earn all the money he could. So for two years he
had let it be as difficult and expensive as possible to be “done by
Campton”; and this oppressive July day had been crowded with the visits
of suppliants of a sort unused to waiting on anybody’s pleasure, people
who had postponed St. Moritz and Deauville, Aix and Royat, because it
was known that one had to accept the master’s conditions or apply
elsewhere.

The job bored him more than ever; the more of their fatuous faces he
recorded the more he hated the task; but for the last two or three days
the monotony of his toil had been relieved by a new element of interest.
This was produced by what he called the “war-funk,” and consisted in the
effect on his sitters and their friends of the suggestion that something
new, incomprehensible and uncomfortable might be about to threaten the
ordered course of their pleasures.

Campton himself did not “believe in the war” (as the current phrase
went); therefore he was able to note with perfect composure its
agitating effect upon his sitters. On the whole the women behaved best:
the idiotic Mme. de Dolmetsch had actually grown beautiful through fear
for her lover, who turned out (in spite of a name as exotic as hers) to
be a French subject of military age. The men had made a less creditable
showing?especially the big banker and promoter, Jorgenstein, whose round
red face had withered like a pricked balloon, and young Prince Demetrios
Palamedes, just married to the fabulously rich daughter of an Argentine
wheat-grower, and so secure as to his bride’s fortune that he could
curse impartially all the disturbers of his summer plans. Even the great
tuberculosis specialist, Fortin-Lescluze, whom Campton was painting in
return for the physician’s devoted care of George the previous year, had
lost something of his professional composure, and no longer gave out the
sense of tranquillizing strength which had been such a help in the boy’s
fight for health. Fortin-Lescluze, always in contact with the rulers of
the earth, must surely have some hint of their councils. Whatever it
was, he revealed nothing, but continued to talk frivolously and
infatuatedly about a new Javanese dancer whom he wanted Campton to
paint; but his large beaked face with its triumphant moustache had grown
pinched and grey, and he had forgotten to renew the dye on the
moustache.

Campton’s one really imperturbable visitor was little Charlie Alicante,
the Spanish secretary of Embassy at Berlin, who had dropped in on his
way to St. Moritz, bringing the newest news from the Wilhelmstrasse news
that was all suavity and reassurance, with a touch of playful reproach
for the irritability of French feeling, and a reminder of Imperial
longanimity in regard to the foolish misunderstandings of Agadir and
Saverne.

Now all the visitors had gone, and Campton, leaning in the window,
looked out over Paris and mused on his summer plans. He meant to plunge
straight down to Southern Italy and Sicily, perhaps even push over to
North Africa. That at least was what he hoped for: no sun was too hot
for him and no landscape too arid. But it all depended on George; for
George was going with him, and if George preferred Spain they would
postpone the desert.

It was almost impossible to Campton to picture what it would be like to
have the boy with him. For so long he had seen his son only in snatches,
hurriedly, incompletely, uncomprehendingly: it was only in the last
three years that their intimacy had had a chance to develop. And they
had never travelled together, except for hasty dashes, two or three
times, to seashore or mountains; had never gone off on a long solitary
journey such as this. Campton, tired, disenchanted, and nearing sixty,
found himself looking forward to the adventure with an eagerness as
great as the different sort of ardour with which, in his youth, he had
imagined flights of another kind with the woman who was to fulfill every
dream.

“Well?I suppose that’s the stuff pictures are made of,” he thought,
smiling at his inextinguishable belief in the completeness of his next
experience. Life had perpetually knocked him down just as he had his
hand on her gifts; nothing had ever succeeded with him but his work. But
he was as sure as ever that peace of mind and contentment of heart were
waiting for him round the next corner; and this time, it was clear, they
were to come to him through his wonderful son.

The doorbell rang, and he listened for the maidservant’s step. There was
another impatient jingle, and he remembered that his faithful Mariette
had left for Lille, where she was to spend her vacation with her family.
Campton, reaching for his stick, shuffled across the studio with his
lame awkward stride.

At the door stood his old friend Paul Dastrey, one of the few men with
whom he had been unbrokenly intimate since the first days of his
disturbed and incoherent Parisian life. Dastrey came in without
speaking: his small dry face, seamed with premature wrinkles of irony
and sensitiveness, looked unusually grave. The wrinkles seemed suddenly
to have become those of an old man; and how grey Dastrey had turned! He
walked a little stiffly, with a jauntiness obviously intended to conceal
a growing tendency to rheumatism.

In the middle of the floor he paused and tapped a varnished boot-tip
with his stick.

“Let’s see what you’ve done to Daisy Dolmetsch.”

“Oh, it’s been done for me?you’ll see!” Campton laughed. He was enjoying
the sight of Dastrey and thinking that this visit was providentially
timed to give him a chance of expatiating on his coming journey. In his
rare moments of expansiveness he felt the need of some substitute for
the background of domestic sympathy which, as a rule, would have simply
bored or exasperated him; and at such times he could always talk to
Dastrey.

The little man screwed up his eyes and continued to tap his varnished
toes.

“But she’s magnificent. She’s seen the Medusa!”

Campton laughed again. “Just so. For days and days I’d been trying to do
something with her; and suddenly the war-funk did it for me.”

“The war-funk?”

“Who’d have thought it? She’s frightened to death about Ladislas
Isador?who is French, it turns out, and mobilisable. The poor soul
thinks there’s going to be war!”

“Well, there _is_,” said Dastrey.

The two men looked at each other: Campton amused, incredulous, a shade
impatient at the perpetual recurrence of the same theme, and aware of
presenting a smile of irritating unresponsiveness to his friend’s solemn
gaze.

“Oh, come?you too? Why, the Duke of Alicante has just left here, fresh
from Berlin. You ought to hear him laugh at us....”

“How about Berlin’s laughing at _him_?” Dastrey sank into a wicker
armchair, drew out a cigarette and forgot to light it. Campton returned
to the window.

“There can’t be war: I’m going to Sicily and Africa with George the day
after to-morrow,” he broke out.

“Ah, George??. To be sure....”

There was a silence; Dastrey had not even smiled. He turned the unlit
cigarette in his dry fingers.

“Too young for ’seventy?and too old for this! Some men are born under a
curse,” he burst out.

“What on earth are you talking about?” Campton exclaimed, forcing his
gaiety a little.

Dastrey stared at him with furious eyes. “But I shall get something,
somewhere ... they can’t stop a man’s enlisting ... I had an old uncle
who did it in ’seventy ... he was older than I am now.”

Campton looked at him compassionately. Poor little circumscribed Paul
Dastrey, whose utmost adventure had been an occasional article in an art
review, an occasional six weeks in the near East! It was pitiful to see
him breathing fire and fury on an enemy one knew to be engaged, at that
very moment, in meeting England and France more than half-way in the
effort to smooth over diplomatic difficulties. But Campton could make
allowances for the nerves of the tragic generation brought up in the
shadow of Sedan.

“Look here,” he said, “I’ll tell you what. Come along with George and
me?as far as Palermo, anyhow. You’re a little stiff again in that left
knee, and we can bake our lamenesses together in the good Sicilian
oven.”

Dastrey had found a match and lighted his cigarette.

“My poor Campton?there’ll be war in three days.”

Campton’s incredulity was shot through with the deadly chill of
conviction. There it was?there would be war! It was too like his cursed
luck not to be true.... He smiled inwardly, perceiving that he was
viewing the question exactly as the despicable Jorgenstein and the
fatuous Prince Demetrios had viewed it: as an unwarrantable interference
with his private plans. Yes?but his case was different.... Here was the
son he had never seen enough of, never till lately seen at all as most
fathers see their sons; and the boy was to be packed off to New York
that winter, to go into a bank; and for the Lord knew how many months
this was to be their last chance, as it was almost their first, of being
together quietly, confidentially, uninterruptedly. These other men were
whining at the interruption of their vile pleasures or their viler
money-making; he, poor devil, was trembling for the chance to lay the
foundation of a complete and lasting friendship with his only son, at
the moment when such understandings do most to shape a youth’s
future.... “And with what I’ve had to fight against!” he groaned, seeing
victory in sight, and sickening at the idea that it might be snatched
from him.

Then another thought came, and he felt the blood leaving his ruddy face
and, as it seemed, receding from every vein of his heavy awkward body.
He sat down opposite Dastrey, and the two looked at each other.

“There won’t be war. But if there were?why shouldn’t George and I go to
Sicily? You don’t see us sitting here making lint, do you?”

Dastrey smiled. “Lint is unhygienic; you won’t have to do that. And I
see no reason why _you_ shouldn’t go to Sicily?or to China.” He paused.
“But how about George?I thought he and you were both born in France?”

Campton reached for a cigarette. “We were, worse luck. He’s subject to
your preposterous military regulations. But it doesn’t make any
difference, as it happens. He’s sure to be discharged after that touch
of tuberculosis he had last year, when he had to be rushed up to the
Engadine.”

“Ah, I see. Then, as you say.... Still, of course he wouldn’t be allowed
to leave the country.”

A constrained silence fell between the two. Campton became aware that,
for the first time since they had known each other, their points of view
were the width of the poles apart. It was hopeless to try to bridge such
a distance.

“Of course, you know,” he said, trying for his easiest voice, “I still
consider this discussion purely academic.... But if it turns out that
I’m wrong I shall do all I can?all I can, do you hear??to get George
discharged.... You’d better know that....”

Dastrey, rising, held out his hand with his faithful smile. “My dear old
Campton, I perfectly understand a foreigner’s taking that view....” He
walked toward the door and they parted without more words.

When he had gone Campton began to recover his reassurance. Who was
Dastrey, poor chap, to behave as if he were in the councils of the
powers? It was perfect nonsense to pretend that a diplomatist straight
from Berlin didn’t know more about what was happening there than the
newsmongers of the Boulevards. One didn’t have to be an Ambassador to
see which way the wind was blowing; and men like Alicante, belonging to
a country uninvolved in the affair, were the only people capable of a
cool judgment at moments of international tension.

Campton took the portrait of Mme. de Dolmetsch and leaned it against the
other canvases along the wall. Then he started clumsily to put the room
to rights?without Mariette he was so helpless?and finally, abandoning
the attempt, said to himself: “I’ll come and wind things up to-morrow.”

He was moving that day from the studio to the Hotel de Crillon, where
George was to join him the next evening. It would be jolly to be with
the boy from the moment he arrived; and, even if Mariette’s departure
had not paralyzed his primitive housekeeping, he could not have made
room for his son at the studio. So, reluctantly, for he loathed luxury
and conformity, but joyously, because he was to be with George, Campton
threw some shabby clothes into a shapeless portmanteau, and prepared to
despatch the concierge for a taxicab.

He was hobbling down the stairs when the old woman met him with a
telegram. He tore it open and saw that it was dated Deauville, and was
not, as he had feared, from his son.

“Very anxious. Must see you to-morrow. Please come to Avenue Marigny at
five without fail. Julia Brant.”

“Oh, damn,” Campton growled, crumpling up the message.

The concierge was looking at him with searching eyes.

“Is it war, sir?” she asked, pointing to the bit of blue paper. He
supposed she was thinking of her grandsons.

“No?no?nonsense! War?” He smiled into her shrewd old face, every wrinkle
of which seemed full of a deep human experience.

“War? Can you imagine anything more absurd? Can you, now? What should
you say if they told you war was going to be declared, Mme. Lebel?”

She gave him back his look with profound earnestness; then she spoke in
a voice of sudden resolution. “Why, I should say we don’t want it,
sir?I’d have four in it if it came?_but that this sort of thing has got
to stop_.”

Campton shrugged. “Oh, well?it’s not going to come, so don’t worry. And
call me a taxi, will you? No, no, I’ll carry the bags down myself.”




                                   II


“But even if they do mobilise: mobilisation is not war?_is_ it?” Mrs.
Anderson Brant repeated across the teacups.

Campton dragged himself up from the deep armchair he had inadvertently
chosen. To escape from his hostess’s troubled eyes he limped across to
the window and stood gazing out at the thick turf and brilliant
flower-borders of the garden which was so unlike his own. After a moment
he turned and glanced about him, catching the reflection of his heavy
figure in a mirror dividing two garlanded panels. He had not entered
Mrs. Brant’s drawing-room for nearly ten years; not since the period of
the interminable discussions about the choice of a school for George;
and in spite of the far graver preoccupations that now weighed on him,
and of the huge menace with which the whole world was echoing, he paused
for an instant to consider the contrast between his clumsy person and
that expensive and irreproachable room.

“You’ve taken away Beausite’s portrait of you,” he said abruptly,
looking up at the chimney-panel, which was filled with the blue and
umber bloom of a Fragonard landscape.

A full-length of Mrs. Anderson Brant by Beausite had been one of Mr.
Brant’s wedding-presents to his bride; a Beausite portrait, at that
time, was as much a part of such marriages as pearls and sables.

“Yes. Anderson thought ... the dress had grown so dreadfully
old-fashioned,” she explained indifferently; and went on again: “You
think it’s _not_ war: don’t you?”

What was the use of telling her what he thought? For years and years he
had not done that?about anything. But suddenly, now, a stringent
necessity had drawn them together, confronting them like any two plain
people caught in a common danger?like husband and wife, for example!

“It _is_ war, this time, I believe,” he said.

She set down her cup with a hand that had begun to tremble.

“I disagree with you entirely,” she retorted, her voice shrill with
anxiety. “I was frightfully upset when I sent you that telegram
yesterday; but I’ve been lunching to-day with the old Duc de
Montlhery?you know he fought in ’seventy?and with Levi-Michel of the
‘Jour,’ who had just seen some of the government people; and they both
explained to me quite clearly??”

“That you’d made a mistake in coming up from Deauville?”

To save himself Campton could not restrain the sneer; on the rare
occasions when a crisis in their lives flung them on each other’s mercy,
the first sensation he was always conscious of was the degree to which
she bored him. He remembered the day, years ago, long before their
divorce, when it had first come home to him that she was always going to
bore him. But he was ashamed to think of that now, and went on more
patiently: “You see, the situation is rather different from anything
we’ve known before; and, after all, in 1870 all the wise people thought
till the last minute that there would be no war.”

Her delicate face seemed to shrink and wither with apprehension.

“Then?what about George?” she asked, the paint coming out about her
haggard eyes.

Campton paused a moment. “You may suppose I’ve thought of _that_.”

“Oh, of course....” He saw she was honestly trying to be what a mother
should be in talking of her only child to that child’s father. But the
long habit of superficiality made her stammering and inarticulate when
her one deep feeling tried to rise to the surface.

Campton seated himself again, taking care to choose a straight-backed
chair. “I see nothing to worry about with regard to George,” he said.

“You mean???”

“Why, they won’t take him?they won’t want him ... with his medical
record.”

“Are you sure? He’s so much stronger.... He’s gained twenty pounds....”
It was terrible, really, to hear her avow it in a reluctant whisper!
That was the view that war made mothers take of the chief blessing they
could ask for their children! Campton understood her, and took the same
view. George’s wonderful recovery, the one joy his parents had shared in
the last twenty years, was now a misfortune to be denied and dissembled.
They looked at each other like accomplices, the same thought in their
eyes: if only the boy had been born in America! It was grotesque that
the whole of joy or anguish should suddenly be found to hang on a
geographical accident.

“After all, we’re Americans; this is not our job?” Campton began.

“No?” He saw she was waiting, and knew for what.

“So of course?if there were any trouble?but there won’t be; if there
were, though, I shouldn’t hesitate to do what was necessary ... use any
influence....”

“Oh, then we agree!” broke from her in a cry of wonder.

The unconscious irony of the exclamation struck him, and increased his
irritation. He remembered the tone?undefinably compassionate?in which
Dastrey had said: “I perfectly understand a foreigner’s taking that
view”.... But _was_ he a foreigner, Campton asked himself? And what was
the criterion of citizenship, if he, who owed to France everything that
had made life worth while, could regard himself as owing her nothing,
now that for the first time he might have something to give her? Well,
for himself that argument was all right: preposterous as he thought
war?any war?he would have offered himself to France on the instant if
she had had any use for his lame carcass. But he had never bargained to
give her his only son.

Mrs. Brant went on in excited argument.

“Of course you know how careful I always am to do nothing about him
without consulting you; but since you feel about it as _we_ do??” She
blushed under her faint rouge. The “we” had slipped out accidentally,
and Campton, aware of turning hard-lipped and grim, sat waiting for her
to repair the blunder. Through the years of his poverty it had been
impossible not to put up, on occasions, with that odious first person
plural: as long as his wretched inability to make money had made it
necessary that his wife’s second husband should pay for his son’s keep,
such allusions had been part of Campton’s long expiation. But even then
he had tacitly made his former wife understand that, when they had to
talk of the boy, he could bear her saying “I think,” or “Anderson
thinks,” this or that, but not “_we_ think it.” And in the last few
years, since Campton’s unforeseen success had put him, to the
astonishment of every one concerned, in a position of financial
independence, “Anderson” had almost entirely dropped out of their talk
about George’s future. Mrs. Brant was not a clever woman, but she had a
social adroitness that sometimes took the place of intelligence.

On this occasion she saw her mistake so quickly, and blushed for it so
painfully, that at any other time Campton would have smiled away her
distress; but at the moment he could not stir a muscle to help her.

“Look here,” he broke out, “there are things I’ve had to accept in the
past, and shall have to accept in the future. The boy is to go into
Bullard and Brant’s?it’s agreed; I’m not sure enough of being able to
provide for him for the next few years to interfere with?with your plans
in that respect. But I thought it was understood once for all??”

She interrupted him excitedly. “Oh, of course ... of course. You must
admit I’ve always respected your feeling....”

He acknowledged awkwardly: “Yes.”

“Well, then?won’t you see that this situation is different, terribly
different, and that we ought all to work together? If Anderson’s
influence can be of use....”

“Anderson’s influence??” Campton’s gorge rose against the phrase! It was
always Anderson’s influence that had been invoked?and none knew better
than Campton himself how justly?when the boy’s future was under
discussion. But in this particular case the suggestion was intolerable.

“Of course,” he interrupted drily. “But, as it happens, I think I can
attend to this job myself.”

She looked down at her huge rings, hesitated visibly, and then flung
tact to the winds. “What makes you think so? You don’t know the right
sort of people.”

It was a long time since she had thrown that at him: not since the
troubled days of their marriage, when it had been the cruellest taunt
she could think of. Now it struck him simply as a particularly
unpalatable truth. No, he didn’t know “the right sort of people” ...
unless, for instance, among his new patrons, such a man as Jorgenstein
answered to the description. But, if there were war, on what side would
a cosmopolitan like Jorgenstein turn out to be?

“Anderson, you see,” she persisted, losing sight of everything in the
need to lull her fears, “Anderson knows all the political people. In a
business way, of course, a big banker has to. If there’s really any
chance of George’s being taken you’ve no right to refuse Anderson’s
help?none whatever!”

Campton was silent. He had meant to reassure her, to reaffirm his
conviction that the boy was sure to be discharged. But as their eyes met
he saw that she believed this no more than he did; and he felt the
contagion of her incredulity.

“But if you’re so sure there’s not going to be war??” he began.

As he spoke he saw her face change, and was aware that the door behind
him had opened and that a short man, bald and slim, was advancing at a
sort of mincing trot across the pompous garlands of the Savonnerie
carpet. Campton got to his feet. He had expected Anderson Brant to stop
at sight of him, mumble a greeting, and then back out of the room?as
usual. But Anderson Brant did nothing of the sort: he merely hastened
his trot toward the tea-table. He made no attempt to shake hands with
Campton, but bowing shyly and stiffly said: “I understood you were
coming, and hurried back ... on the chance ... to consult....”

Campton gazed at him without speaking. They had not seen each other
since the extraordinary occasion, two years before, when Mr. Brant,
furtively one day at dusk, had come to his studio to offer to buy
George’s portrait; and, as their eyes met, the memory of that visit
reddened both their faces.

Mr. Brant was a compact little man of about sixty. His sandy hair, just
turning grey, was brushed forward over a baldness which was ivory-white
at the crown and became brick-pink above the temples, before merging
into the tanned and freckled surface of his face. He was always dressed
in carefully cut clothes of a discreet grey, with a tie to match, in
which even the plump pearl was grey, so that he reminded Campton of a
dry perpendicular insect in protective tints; and the fancy was
encouraged by his cautious manner, and the way he had of peering over
his glasses as if they were part of his armour. His feet were small and
pointed, and seemed to be made of patent leather; and shaking hands with
him was like clasping a bunch of twigs.

It had been Campton’s lot, on the rare occasions of his meeting Mr.
Brant, always to see this perfectly balanced man in moments of
disequilibrium, when the attempt to simulate poise probably made him
more rigid than nature had created him. But to-day his perturbation
betrayed itself in the gesture with which he drummed out a tune on the
back of the gold and platinum cigar-case he had unconsciously drawn from
his pocket.

After a moment he seemed to become aware of what he had in his hand, and
pressing the sapphire spring held out the case with the remark:
“Coronas.”

Campton made a movement of refusal, and Mr. Brant, overwhelmed, thrust
the cigar-case away.

“I ought to have taken one?I may need him,” Campton thought; and Mrs.
Brant said, addressing her husband: “He thinks as _we_ do?exactly.”

Campton winced. Thinking as the Brants did was, at all times, so foreign
to his nature and his principles that his first impulse was to protest.
But the sight of Mr. Brant, standing there helplessly, and trying to
hide the twitching of his lip by stroking his lavender-scented moustache
with a discreetly curved hand, moved the painter’s imagination.

“Poor devil?he’d give all his millions if the boy were safe,” he
thought, “and he doesn’t even dare to say so.”

It satisfied Campton’s sense of his rights that these two powerful
people were hanging on his decision like frightened children, and he
answered, looking at Mrs. Brant: “There’s nothing to be done at present
... absolutely nothing?? Except,” he added abruptly, “to take care not
to talk in this way to George.”

Mrs. Brant lifted a startled gaze.

“What do you mean? If war is declared, you can’t expect me not to speak
of it to him.”

“Speak of it as much as you like, but don’t drag him in. Let him work
out his own case for himself.”

He went on with an effort: “It’s what I intend to do.”

“But you said you’d use every influence!” she protested, obtusely.

“Well?I believe this is one of them.”

She looked down resignedly at her clasped hands, and he saw her lips
tighten. “My telling her that has been just enough to start her on the
other tack,” he groaned to himself, all her old stupidities rising up
around him like a fog.

Mr. Brant gave a slight cough and removed his protecting hand from his
lips.

“Mr. Campton is right,” he said, quickly and timorously. “I take the
same view?entirely. George must not know that we are thinking of using
... any means....” He coughed again, and groped for the cigar-case.

As he spoke, there came over Campton a sense of their possessing a
common ground of understanding that Campton had never found in his wife.
He had had a hint of the same feeling, but had voluntarily stifled it,
on the day when Mr. Brant, apologetic yet determined, had come to the
studio to buy George’s portrait. Campton had seen then how the man
suffered from his failure, but had chosen to attribute his distress to
the humiliation of finding there were things his money could not
purchase. Now, that judgment seemed as unimaginative as he had once
thought Mr. Brant’s overture. Campton turned on the banker a look that
was almost brotherly.

“We men know ...” the look said; and Mr. Brant’s parched cheek was
suffused with a flush of understanding. Then, as if frightened at the
consequences of such complicity, he repeated his bow and went out.

When Campton issued forth into the Avenue Marigny, it came to him as a
surprise to see the old unheeding life of Paris still going on. In the
golden decline of day the usual throng of idlers sat under the
horse-chestnuts of the Champs Elysees, children scampered between turf
and flowers, and the perpetual stream of motors rolled-up the central
avenue to the restaurants beyond the gates.

Under the last trees of the Avenue Gabriel the painter stood looking
across the Place de la Concorde. No doubt the future was dark: he had
guessed from Mr. Brant’s precipitate arrival that the banks and the
Stock Exchange feared the worst. But what could a man do, whose
convictions were so largely formed by the play of things on his retina,
when, in the setting sun, all that majesty of space and light and
architecture was spread out before him undisturbed? Paris was too
triumphant a fact not to argue down his fears. There she lay in the
security of her beauty, and once more proclaimed herself eternal.




                                  III


The night was so lovely that, though the Boulogne express arrived late,
George at once proposed dining in the Bois.

His luggage, of which, as usual, there was a good deal, was dropped at
the Crillon, and they shot up the Champs Elysees as the summer dusk
began to be pricked by lamps.

“How jolly the old place smells!” George cried, breathing in the scent
of sun-warmed asphalt, of flowerbeds and freshly-watered dust. He seemed
as much alive to such impressions as if his first word at the station
had not been: “Well, this time I suppose we’re in for it.” In for it
they might be; but meanwhile he meant to enjoy the scents and scenes of
Paris as acutely and unconcernedly as ever.

Campton had hoped that he would pick out one of the humble cyclists’
restaurants near the Seine; but not he. “Madrid, is it?” he said gaily,
as the taxi turned into the Bois; and there they sat under the
illuminated trees, in the general glitter and expensiveness, with the
Tziganes playing down their talk, and all around them the painted faces
that seemed to the father so old and obvious, and to the son, no doubt,
so full of novelty and mystery.

The music made conversation difficult; but Campton did not care. It was
enough to sit and watch the face in which, after each absence, he noted
a new and richer vivacity. He had often tried to make up his mind if his
boy were handsome. Not that the father’s eye influenced the painter’s;
but George’s young head, with its thick blond thatch, the complexion
ruddy to the golden eyebrows, and then abruptly white on the forehead,
the short amused nose, the inquisitive eyes, the ears lying back flat to
the skull against curly edges of fair hair, defied all rules and escaped
all classifications by a mixture of romantic gaiety and shrewd plainness
like that in certain eighteenth-century portraits.

As father and son faced each other over the piled-up peaches, while the
last sparkle of champagne died down in their glasses, Campton’s thoughts
went back to the day when he had first discovered his son. George was a
schoolboy of twelve, at home for the Christmas holidays. At home meant
at the Brants’, since it was always there he stayed: his father saw him
only on certain days. Usually Mariette fetched him to the studio on one
afternoon in the week; but this particular week George was ill, and it
had been arranged that in case of illness his father was to visit him at
his mother’s. He had one of his frequent bad colds, and Campton recalled
him, propped up in bed in his luxurious overheated room, a scarlet
sweater over his nightshirt, a book on his thin knees, and his ugly
little fever-flushed face bent over it in profound absorption. Till that
moment George had never seemed to care for books: his father had
resigned himself to the probability of seeing him grow up into the
ordinary pleasant young fellow, with his mother’s worldly tastes. But
the boy was reading as only a bookworm reads?reading with his very
finger-tips, and his inquisitive nose, and the perpetual dart ahead of a
gaze that seemed to guess each phrase from its last word. He looked up
with a smile, and said: “Oh, Dad ...” but it was clear that he regarded
the visit as an interruption. Campton, leaning over, saw that the book
was a first edition of Lavengro.

“Where the deuce did you get that?”

George looked at him with shining eyes. “Didn’t you know? Mr. Brant has
started collecting first editions. There’s a chap who comes over from
London with things for him. He lets me have them to look at when I’m
seedy. I say, isn’t this topping? Do you remember the fight?” And,
marvelling once more at the ways of Providence, Campton perceived that
the millionaire’s taste for owning books had awakened in his stepson a
taste for reading them. “I couldn’t have done that for him,” the father
had reflected with secret bitterness. It was not that a bibliophile’s
library was necessary to develop a taste for letters; but that Campton
himself, being a small reader, had few books about him, and usually
borrowed those few. If George had lived with him he might never have
guessed the boy’s latent hunger, for the need of books as part of one’s
daily food would scarcely have presented itself to him.

From that day he and George had understood each other. Initiation had
come to them in different ways, but their ardour for beauty had the same
root. The visible world, and its transposition in terms of one art or
another, were thereafter the subject of their interminable talks; and
Campton, with a passionate interest, watched his son absorbing through
books what had mysteriously reached him through his paintbrush.

They had been parted often, and for long periods; first by George’s
schooling in England, next by his French military service, begun at
eighteen to facilitate his entry into Harvard; finally, by his sojourn
at the University. But whenever they were together they seemed to make
up in the first ten minutes for the longest separation; and since George
had come of age, and been his own master, he had given his father every
moment he could spare.

His career at Harvard had been interrupted, after two years, by the
symptoms of tuberculosis which had necessitated his being hurried off to
the Engadine. He had returned completely cured, and at his own wish had
gone back to Harvard; and having finished his course and taken his
degree, he had now come out to join his father on a long holiday before
entering the New York banking-house of Bullard and Brant.

Campton, looking at the boy’s bright head across the lights and flowers,
thought how incredibly stupid it was to sacrifice an hour of such a life
to the routine of money-getting; but he had had that question out with
himself once for all, and was not going to return to it. His own
success, if it lasted, would eventually help him to make George
independent; but meanwhile he had no right to interfere with the boy’s
business training. He had hoped that George would develop some marked
talent, some irresistible tendency which would decide his future too
definitely for interference; but George was twenty-five, and no such
call had come to him. Apparently he was fated to be only a delighted
spectator and commentator; to enjoy and interpret, not to create. And
Campton knew that this absence of a special bent, with the strain and
absorption it implies, gave the boy his peculiar charm. The trouble was
that it made him the prey of other people’s plans for him. And now all
these plans?Campton’s dreams for the future as well as the business
arrangements which were Mr. Brant’s contribution?might be wrecked by
to-morrow’s news from Berlin. The possibility still seemed unthinkable;
but in spite of his incredulity the evil shadow hung on him as he and
his son chatted of political issues.

George made no allusion to his own case: his whole attitude was so
dispassionate that his father began to wonder if he had not solved the
question by concluding that he would not pass the medical examination.
The tone he took was that the whole affair, from the point of view of
twentieth-century civilization, was too monstrous an incongruity for
something not to put a stop to it at the eleventh hour. His easy
optimism at first stimulated his father, and then began to jar on him.

“Dastrey doesn’t think it can be stopped,” Campton said at length.

The boy smiled.

“Dear old Dastrey! No, I suppose not. That after-Sedan generation have
got the inevitability of war in their bones. They’ve never been able to
get beyond it. _Our_ whole view is different: we’re internationals,
whether we want to be or not.”

“To begin with, if by ‘our’ view you mean yours and mine, you and I
haven’t a drop of French blood in us,” his father interposed, “and we
can never really know what the French feel on such matters.”

George looked at him affectionately. “Oh, but I didn’t?I meant ‘we’ in
the sense of my generation, of whatever nationality. I know French chaps
who feel as I do?Louis Dastrey, Paul’s nephew, for one; and lots of
English ones. They don’t believe the world will ever stand for another
war. It’s too stupidly uneconomic, to begin with: I suppose you’ve read
Angell? Then life’s worth too much, and nowadays too many millions of
people know it. That’s the way we all feel. Think of everything that
counts?art and science and poetry, and all the rest?going to smash at
the nod of some doddering diplomatist! It was different in old times,
when the best of life, for the immense majority, was never anything but
plague, pestilence and famine. People are too healthy and well-fed now;
they’re not going off to die in a ditch to oblige anybody.”

Campton looked away, and his eye, straying over the crowd, lit on the
long heavy face of Fortin-Lescluze, seated with a group of men on the
other side of the garden.

Why had it never occurred to him before that if there was one being in
the world who could get George discharged it was the great specialist
under whose care he had been?

“Suppose war does come,” the father thought, “what if I were to go over
and tell him I’ll paint his dancer?” He stood up and made his way
between the tables.

Fortin-Lescluze was dining with a party of jaded-looking politicians and
journalists. To reach him Campton had to squeeze past another table, at
which a fair worn-looking lady sat beside a handsome old man with a
dazzling mane of white hair and a Grand Officer’s rosette of the Legion
of Honour. Campton bowed, and the lady whispered something to her
companion, who returned a stately vacant salute. Poor old Beausite,
dining alone with his much-wronged and all-forgiving wife, bowing to the
people she told him to bow to, and placidly murmuring: “War?war,” as he
stuck his fork into the peach she had peeled!

At Fortin’s table the faces were less placid. The men greeted Campton
with a deference which was not lost on Mme. Beausite, and the painter
bent close over Fortin, embarrassed at the idea that she might overhear
him. “If I can make time for a sketch?will you bring your dancing lady
to-morrow?”

The physician’s eyes lit up under their puffy lids.

“My dear friend?will I? She’s simply set her heart on it!” He drew out
his watch and added: “But why not tell her the good news yourself? You
told me, I think, you’d never seen her? This is her last night at the
‘Posada,’ and if you’ll jump into my motor we shall be just in time to
see her come on.”

Campton beckoned to George, and father and son followed Fortin-Lescluze.
None of the three men, on the way back to Paris, made any reference to
the war. The physician asked George a few medical questions, and
complimented him on his look of recovered health; then the talk strayed
to studios and theatres, where Fortin-Lescluze firmly kept it.

The last faint rumours of the conflict died out on the threshold of the
“Posada.” It would have been hard to discern, in the crowded audience,
any appearance but that of ordinary pleasure-seekers momentarily stirred
by a new sensation. Collectively, fashionable Paris was already away, at
the seashore or in the mountains, but not a few of its chief ornaments
still lingered, as the procession through Campton’s studio had proved;
and others had returned drawn back by doubts about the future, the
desire to be nearer the source of news, the irresistible French craving
for the forum and the market when messengers are foaming in. The public
of the “Posada,” therefore, was still Parisian enough to flatter the new
dancer; and on all the pleasure-tired faces, belonging to every type of
money-getters and amusement-seekers, Campton saw only the old familiar
music-hall look: the look of a house with lights blazing and windows
wide, but nobody and nothing within.

The usualness of it all gave him a sense of ease which his boy’s
enjoyment confirmed. George, lounging on the edge of their box, and
watching the yellow dancer with a clear-eyed interest refreshingly
different from Fortin’s tarnished gaze, George so fresh and cool and
unafraid, seemed to prove that a world which could produce such youths
would never again settle its differences by the bloody madness of war.

Gradually Campton became absorbed in the dancer and began to observe her
with the concentration he brought to bear on any subject that attracted
his brush. He saw that she was more paintable than he could have hoped,
though not in the extravagant dress and attitude he was sure her eminent
admirer would prefer; but rather as a little crouching animal against a
sun-baked wall. He smiled at the struggle he should have when the
question of costume came up.

“Well, I’ll do her, if you like,” he turned to say; and two tears of
senile triumph glittered on the physician’s cheeks.

“To-morrow, then?at two?may I bring her? She leaves as soon as possible
for the south. She lives on sun, heat, radiance....”

“To-morrow?yes,” Campton nodded.

His decision once reached, the whole subject bored him, and in spite of
Fortin’s entreaties he got up and signalled to George.

As they strolled home through the brilliant midnight streets, the boy
said: “Did I hear you tell old Fortin you were going to do his dancer?”

“Yes?why not? She’s very paintable,” said Campton, abruptly shaken out
of his security.

“Beginning to-morrow?”

“Why not?”

“Come, you know?_to-morrow_!” George laughed.

“We’ll see,” his father rejoined, with an obscure sense that if he went
on steadily enough doing his usual job it might somehow divert the
current of events.

On the threshold of the hotel they were waylaid by an elderly man with a
round face and round eyes behind gold eye-glasses. His grey hair was cut
in a fringe over his guileless forehead, and he was dressed in expensive
evening clothes, and shone with soap and shaving; but the anxiety of a
frightened child puckered his innocent brow and twitching cheeks.

“My dear Campton?the very man I’ve been hunting for! You remember
me?your cousin Harvey Mayhew of Utica?”

Campton, with an effort, remembered, and asked what he could do,
inwardly hoping it was not a portrait.

“Oh, the simplest thing in the world. You see, I’m here as a Delegate??”
At Campton’s look of enquiry, Mr. Mayhew interrupted himself to explain:
“To the Peace Congress at The Hague??why, yes: naturally. I landed only
this morning, and find myself in the middle of all this rather foolish
excitement, and unable to make out just how I can reach my destination.
My time is?er?valuable, and it is very unfortunate that all this
commotion should be allowed to interfere with our work. It would be most
annoying if, after having made the effort to break away from Utica, I
should arrive too late for the opening of the Congress.”

Campton looked at him wonderingly. “Then you’re going anyhow?”

“Going? Why not? You surely don’t think???” Mr. Mayhew threw back his
shoulders, pink and impressive. “I shouldn’t, in any case, allow
anything so opposed to my convictions as _war_ to interfere with my
carrying out my mandate. All I want is to find out the route least
likely to be closed if?if this monstrous thing should happen.”

Campton considered. “Well, if I were you, I should go round by
Luxembourg?it’s longer, but you’ll be out of the way of trouble.” He
gave a nod of encouragement, and the Peace Delegate thanked him
profusely.

Father and son were lodged on the top floor of the Crillon, in the
little apartment which opens on the broad terraced roof. Campton had
wanted to put before his boy one of the city’s most perfect scenes; and
when they reached their sitting-room George went straight out onto the
terrace, and leaning on the parapet, called back: “Oh, don’t go to bed
yet?it’s too jolly.”

Campton followed, and the two stood looking down on the festal expanse
of the Place de la Concorde strown with great flower-clusters of lights
between its pearly distances. The sky was full of stars, pale, remote,
half-drowned in the city’s vast illumination; and the foliage of the
Champs Elysees and the Tuileries made masses of mysterious darkness
behind the statues and the flashing fountains.

For a long time neither father nor son spoke; then Campton said: “Are
you game to start the day after to-morrow?”

George waited a moment. “For Africa?”

“Well?my idea would be to push straight through to the south?as far as
Palermo, say. All this cloudy watery loveliness gives me a furious
appetite for violent red earth and white houses crackling in the glare.”

George again pondered; then he said: “It sounds first-rate. But if
you’re so sure we’re going to start why did you tell Fortin to bring
that girl to-morrow?”

Campton, reddening in the darkness, felt as if his son’s clear eyes were
following the motions of his blood. Had George suspected why he had
wanted to ingratiate himself with the physician?

“It was stupid?I’ll put her off,” he muttered. He dropped into an
armchair, and sat there, in his clumsy infirm attitude, his arms folded
behind his head, while George continued to lean on the parapet.

The boy’s question had put an end to their talk by baring the throbbing
nerve of his father’s anxiety. If war were declared the next day, what
did George mean to do? There was every hope of his obtaining his
discharge; but would he lend himself to the attempt? The deadly fear of
crystallizing his son’s refusal by forcing him to put it into words kept
Campton from asking the question.




                                   IV


The evening was too beautiful, and too full of the sense of fate, for
sleep to be possible, and long after George had finally said “All the
same, I think I’ll turn in,” his father sat on, listening to the gradual
subsidence of the traffic, and watching the night widen above Paris.

As he sat there, discouragement overcame him. His last plan, his plan
for getting George finally and completely over to his side, was going to
fail as all his other plans had failed. If there were war there would be
no more portraits to paint, and his vision of wealth would vanish as
visions of love and happiness and comradeship had one by one faded away.
Nothing had ever succeeded with him but the thing he had in some moods
set least store by, the dogged achievement of his brush; and just as
that was about to assure his happiness, here was this horrible
world-catastrophe threatening to fall across his path.

His misfortune had been that he could neither get on easily with people
nor live without them; could never wholly isolate himself in his art,
nor yet resign himself to any permanent human communion that left it
out, or, worse still, dragged it in irrelevantly. He had tried both
kinds, and on the whole preferred the first. His marriage, his stupid
ill-fated marriage, had after all not been the most disenchanting of his
adventures, because Julia Ambrose, when she married him, had made no
pretense of espousing his art.

He had seen her first in the tumble-down Venetian palace where she lived
with her bachelor uncle, old Horace Ambrose, who dabbled in bric-a-brac
and cultivated a guileless Bohemianism. Campton, looking back, could
still understand why, to a youth fresh from Utica, at odds with his
father, unwilling to go into the family business, and strangling with
violent unexpressed ideas on art and the universe, marriage with Julia
Ambrose had seemed so perfect a solution. She had been brought up abroad
by her parents, a drifting and impecunious American couple; and after
their deaths, within a few months of each other, her education had been
completed, at her uncle’s expense, in a fashionable Parisian convent.
Thence she had been transplanted at nineteen to his Venetian household,
and all the ideas that most terrified and scandalized Campton’s family
were part of the only air she had breathed. She had never intentionally
feigned an exaggerated interest in his ambitions. But her bringing-up
made her regard them as natural; she knew what he was aiming at, though
she had never understood his reasons for trying. The jargon of art was
merely one of her many languages; but she talked it so fluently that he
had taken it for her mother-tongue.

The only other girls he had known well were his sisters?earnest
eye-glassed young women, whose one answer to all his problems was that
he ought to come home. The idea of Europe had always been terrifying to
them, and indeed to his whole family, since the extraordinary
misadventure whereby, as the result of a protracted diligence journey
over bad roads, of a violent thunderstorm, and a delayed steamer,
Campton had been born in Paris instead of Utica. Mrs. Campton the elder
had taken the warning to heart, and never again left her native soil;
but the sisters, safely and properly brought into the world in their own
city and State, had always felt that Campton’s persistent yearnings for
Europe, and his inexplicable detachment from Utica and the Mangle, were
mysteriously due to the accident of their mother’s premature
confinement.

Compared with the admonitions of these domestic censors, Miss Ambrose’s
innocent conversation was as seductive as the tangles of Neæra’s hair,
and it used to be a joke between them (one of the few he had ever been
able to make her see) that he, the raw up-Stater, was Parisian born,
while she, the glass and pattern of worldly knowledge, had seen the
light in the pure atmosphere of Madison Avenue.

Through her, in due course, he came to know another girl, a queer abrupt
young American, already an old maid at twenty-two, and in open revolt
against her family for reasons not unlike his own. Adele Anthony had
come abroad to keep house for a worthless “artistic” brother, who was
preparing to be a sculptor by prolonged sessions in Anglo-American bars
and the lobbies of music-halls. When he finally went under, and was
shipped home, Miss Anthony stayed on in Paris, ashamed, as she told
Campton, to go back and face the righteous triumph of a family
connection who had unanimously disbelieved in the possibility of making
Bill Anthony into a sculptor, and in the wisdom of his sister’s staking
her small means on the venture.

“Somehow, behind it all, I was right, and they were wrong; but to do
anything with poor Bill I ought to have been able to begin two or three
generations back,” she confessed.

Miss Anthony had many friends in Paris, of whom Julia Ambrose was the
most admired; and she had assisted sympathizingly (if not
enthusiastically) at Campton’s wooing of Julia, and their hasty
marriage. Her only note of warning had been the reminder that Julia had
always been poor, and had always lived as if she were rich; and that was
silenced by Campton’s rejoinder that the Magic Mangle, to which the
Campton prosperity was due, was some day going to make him rich, though
he had always lived as if he were poor.

“Well?you’d better not, any longer,” Adele sharply advised; and he
laughed, and promised to go out and buy a new hat. In truth, careless of
comfort as he was, he adored luxury in women, and was resolved to let
his wife ruin him if she did it handsomely enough. Doubtless she might
have, had fate given her time; but soon after their marriage old Mr.
Campton died, and it was found that a trusted manager had so invested
the profits of the Mangle that the heirs inherited only a series of
law-suits.

John Campton, henceforth, was merely the unsuccessful son of a ruined
manufacturer; painting became a luxury he could no longer afford, and
his mother and sisters besought him to come back and take over what was
left of the business. It seemed so clearly his duty that, with anguish
of soul, he prepared to go; but Julia, on being consulted, developed a
sudden passion for art and poverty.

“We’d have to live in Utica?for some years at any rate?”

“Well, yes, no doubt??” They faced the fact desolately.

“They’d much better look out for another manager. What do you know about
business? Since you’ve taken up painting you’d better try to make a
success of that,” she advised him; and he was too much of the same mind
not to agree.

It was not long before George’s birth, and they were fully resolved to
go home for the event, and thus spare their hoped for heir the
inconvenience of coming into the world, like his father, in a foreign
country. But now this was not to be thought of, and the eventual
inconvenience to George was lost sight of by his progenitors in the
contemplation of nearer problems.

For a few years their life dragged along shabbily and depressingly. Now
that Campton’s painting was no longer an amateur’s hobby but a domestic
obligation, Julia thought it her duty to interest herself in it; and her
only idea of doing so was by means of what she called “relations,” using
the word in its French and diplomatic sense.

She was convinced that her husband’s lack of success was due to
Beausite’s blighting epigram, and to Campton’s subsequent resolve to
strike out for himself. “It’s a great mistake to try to be original till
people have got used to you,” she said, with the shrewdness that
sometimes startled him. “If you’d only been civil to Beausite he would
have ended by taking you up, and then you could have painted as queerly
as you liked.”

Beausite, by this time, had succumbed to the honours which lie in wait
for such talents, and in his starred and titled maturity his earlier
dread of rivals had given way to a prudent benevolence. Young artists
were always welcome at the receptions he gave in his sumptuous hotel of
the Avenue du Bois. Those who threatened to be rivals were even invited
to dine; and Julia was justified in triumphing when such an invitation
finally rewarded her efforts.

Campton, with a laugh, threw the card into the stove.

“If you’d only understand that that’s not the way,” he said.

“What is, then?”

“Why, letting all that lot see what unutterable rubbish one thinks
them!”

“I should have thought you’d tried that long enough,” she said with pale
lips; but he answered jovially that it never palled on him.

She was bitterly offended; but she knew Campton by this time, and was
not a woman to waste herself in vain resentment. She simply suggested
that since he would not profit by Beausite’s advance the only
alternative was to try to get orders for portraits; and though at that
stage he was not in the mood for portrait-painting, he made an honest
attempt to satisfy her. She began, of course, by sitting for him. She
sat again and again; but, lovely as she was, he was not inspired, and
one day, in sheer self-defence, he blurted out that she was not
paintable. She never forgot the epithet, and it loomed large in their
subsequent recriminations.

Adele Anthony?it was just like her?gave him his first order, and she did
prove paintable. Campton made a success of her long crooked pink-nosed
face; but she didn’t perceive it (she had wanted something oval, with
tulle, and a rose in a taper hand), and after heroically facing the
picture for six months she hid it away in an attic, whence, a year or so
before the date of the artist’s present musings, it had been fished out
as an “early Campton,” to be exhibited half a dozen times, and have
articles written about it in the leading art reviews.

Adele’s picture acted as an awful warning to intending patrons,
and after one or two attempts at depicting mistrustful friends
Campton refused to constrain his muse, and no more was said of
portrait-painting. But life in Paris was growing too expensive. He
persuaded Julia to try Spain, and they wandered about there for a
year. She was not fault-finding, she did not complain, but she
hated travelling, she could not eat things cooked in oil, and his
pictures seemed to her to be growing more and more ugly and
unsalable.

Finally they came one day to Ronda, after a trying sojourn at Cordova.
In the train Julia had moaned a little at the mosquitoes of the previous
night, and at the heat and dirt of the second-class compartment; then,
always conscious of the ill-breeding of fretfulness, she had bent her
lovely head above her Tauchnitz. And it was then that Campton, looking
out of the window to avoid her fatally familiar profile, had suddenly
discovered another. It was that of a peasant girl in front of a small
whitewashed house, under a white pergola hung with bunches of big red
peppers. The house, which was close to the railway, was propped against
an orange-coloured rock, and in the glare cast up from the red earth its
walls looked as blue as snow in shadow. The girl was all blue-white too,
from her cotton skirt to the kerchief knotted turban-wise above two
folds of blue-black hair. Her round forehead and merry nose were
relieved like a bronze medallion against the wall; and she stood with
her hands on her hips, laughing at a little pig asleep under a
cork-tree, who lay on his side like a dog.

The vision filled the carriage-window and then vanished; but it remained
so sharply impressed on Campton that even then he knew what was going to
happen. He leaned back with a sense of relief, and forgot everything
else.

The next morning he said to his wife: “There’s a little place up the
line that I want to go back and paint. You don’t mind staying here a day
or two, do you?”

She said she did not mind; it was what she always said; but he was
somehow aware that this was the particular grievance she had always been
waiting for. He did not care for that, or for anything but getting a
seat in the diligence which started every morning for the village
nearest the white house. On the way he remembered that he had left Julia
only forty pesetas, but he did not care about that either.... He stayed
a month, and when he returned to Ronda his wife had gone back to Paris,
leaving a letter to say that the matter was in the hands of her lawyers.

“What did you do it for?I mean in that particular way? For goodness
knows I understand all the rest,” Adele Anthony had once asked him,
while the divorce proceedings were going on; and he had shaken his head,
conscious that he could not explain.

It was a year or two later that he met the first person who _did_
understand: a Russian lady who had heard the story, was curious to know
him, and asked, one day, when their friendship had progressed, to see
the sketches he had brought back from his _fugue_.

“_Comme je vous comprends!_” she had murmured, her grey eyes deep in
his; but perceiving that she did not allude to the sketches, but to his
sentimental adventure, Campton pushed the drawings out of sight, vexed
with himself for having shown them.

He forgave the Russian lady her artistic obtuseness for the sake of her
human comprehension. They had met at the loneliest moment of his life,
when his art seemed to have failed him like everything else, and when
the struggle to get possession of his son, which had been going on in
the courts ever since the break with Julia, had finally been decided
against him. His Russian friend consoled, amused and agitated him, and
after a few years drifted out of his life as irresponsibly as she had
drifted into it; and he found himself, at forty-five, a lonely thwarted
man, as full as ever of faith in his own powers, but with little left in
human nature or in opportunity. It was about this time that he heard
that Julia was to marry again, and that his boy would have a stepfather.

He knew that even his own family thought it “the best thing that could
happen.” They were tired of clubbing together to pay Julia’s alimony,
and heaved a united sigh of relief when they learned that her second
choice had fallen, not on the bankrupt “foreign Count” they had always
dreaded, but on the Paris partner of the famous bank of Bullard and
Brant. Mr. Brant’s request that his wife’s alimony should be
discontinued gave him a moral superiority which even Campton’s recent
successes could not shake. It was felt that the request expressed the
contempt of an income easily counted in seven figures for a pittance
painfully screwed up to four; and the Camptons admired Mr. Brant much
more for not needing their money than for refusing it.

Their attitude left John Campton without support in his struggle to keep
a hold on his boy. His family sincerely thought George safer with the
Brants than with his own father, and the father could advance to the
contrary no arguments they would have understood. All the forces of
order seemed leagued against him; and it was perhaps this fact that
suddenly drove him into conformity with them. At any rate, from the day
of Julia’s remarriage no other woman shared her former husband’s life.
Campton settled down to the solitude of his dusty studio at Montmartre,
and painted doggedly, all his thoughts on George.

                  *       *       *       *       *

At this point in his reminiscences the bells of Sainte Clotilde rang out
the half-hour after midnight, and Campton rose and went into the
darkened sitting-room.

The door into George’s room was open, and in the silence the father
heard the boy’s calm breathing. A light from the bathroom cast its ray
on the dressing-table, which was scattered with the contents of George’s
pockets. Campton, dwelling with a new tenderness on everything that
belonged to his son, noticed a smart antelope card-case (George had his
mother’s weakness for Bond Street novelties), a wrist-watch, his studs,
a bundle of bank-notes; and beside these a thumbed and dirty red book,
the size of a large pocket-diary.

The father wondered what it was; then of a sudden he knew. He had once
seen Mme. Lebel’s grandson pull just such a red book from his pocket as
he was leaving for his “twenty-eight days” of military service; it was
the _livret militaire_ that every French citizen under forty-eight
carries about with him.

Campton had never paid much attention to French military regulations:
George’s service over, he had dismissed the matter from his mind,
forgetting that his son was still a member of the French army, and as
closely linked to the fortunes of France as the grandson of the
concierge of Montmartre. Now it occurred to him that that little red
book would answer the questions he had not dared to put; and stealing
in, he possessed himself of it and carried it back to the sitting-room.
There he sat down by the lamp and read.

First George’s name, his domicile, his rank as a _marechal des logis_ of
dragoons, the number of his regiment and its base: all that was already
familiar. But what was this on the next page?

“In case of general mobilisation announced to the populations of France
by public proclamations, or by notices posted in the streets, the bearer
of this order is to rejoin his regiment at ??.

“He is to take with him provisions for one day.

“He is to present himself at the station of ?? on the third day of
mobilisation at 6 o’clock, and to take the train indicated by the
station-master.

“The days of mobilisation are counted from 0 o’clock to 24 o’clock. The
first day is that on which the order of mobilisation is published.”

Campton dropped the book and pressed his hands to his temples. “The days
of mobilisation are counted from 0 o’clock to 24 o’clock. The first day
is that on which the order of mobilisation is published.” Then, if
France mobilised that day, George would start the second day after, at
six in the morning. George might be going to leave him within
forty-eight hours from that very moment!

Campton had always vaguely supposed that, some day or other, if war
came, a telegram would call George to his base; it had never occurred to
him that every detail of the boy’s military life had long since been
regulated by the dread power which had him in its grasp.

He read the next paragraph: “The bearer will travel free of charge??”
and thought with a grin how it would annoy Anderson Brant that the
French government should presume to treat his stepson as if he could not
pay his way. The plump bundle of bank-notes on the dressing-table seemed
to look with ineffectual scorn at the red book that sojourned so
democratically in the same pocket. And Campton, picturing George jammed
into an overcrowded military train, on the plebeian wooden seat of a
third-class compartment, grinned again, forgetful of his own anxiety in
the vision of Brant’s exasperation.

Ah, well, it wasn’t war yet, whatever they said!

He carried the red book back to the dressing-table. The light falling
across the bed drew his eye to the young face on the pillow. George lay
on his side, one arm above his head, the other laxly stretched along the
bed. He had thrown off the blankets, and the sheet, clinging to his
body, modelled his slim flank and legs as he lay in dreamless rest.

For a long time Campton stood gazing; then he stole back to the
sitting-room, picked up a sketch-book and pencil and returned. He knew
there was no danger of waking George, and he began to draw, eagerly but
deliberately, fascinated by the happy accident of the lighting, and of
the boy’s position.

“Like a statue of a young knight I’ve seen somewhere,” he said to
himself, vexed and surprised that he, whose plastic memories were always
so precise, should not remember where; and then his pencil stopped. What
he had really thought was: “Like the _effigy_ of a young knight”?though
he had instinctively changed the word as it formed itself. He leaned in
the doorway, the sketch-book in hand, and continued to gaze at his son.
It was the clinging sheet, no doubt, that gave him that look ... and the
white glare of the electric burner.

If war came, that was just the way a boy might lie on a battle-field-or
afterward in a hospital bed. Not _his_ boy, thank heaven; but very
probably his boy’s friends: hundreds and thousands of boys like his boy,
the age of his boy, with a laugh like his boy’s.... The wicked waste of
it! Well, that was what war meant ... what to-morrow might bring to
millions of parents like himself.

He stiffened his shoulders, and opened the sketch-book again. What
watery stuff was he made of, he wondered? Just because the boy lay as if
he were posing for a tombstone!... What of Signorelli, who had sat at
his dead son’s side and drawn him, tenderly, minutely, while the coffin
waited?

Well, damn Signorelli?that was all! Campton threw down his book, turned
out the sitting-room lights, and limped away to bed.




                                   V


The next morning he said to George, over coffee on the terrace: “I think
I’ll drop in at Cook’s about our tickets.”

George nodded, munching his golden roll.

“Right. I’ll run up to see mother, then.”

His father was silent. Inwardly he was saying to himself: “The chances
are she’ll be going back to Deauville this afternoon.”

There had not been much to gather from the newspapers heaped at their
feet. Austria had ordered general mobilisation; but while the tone of
the despatches was nervous and contradictory that of the leading
articles remained almost ominously reassuring. Campton absorbed the
reassurance without heeding its quality: it was a drug he had to have at
any price.

He expected the Javanese dancer to sit to him that afternoon, but he had
not proposed to George to be present. On the chance that things might
eventually take a wrong turn he meant to say a word to Fortin-Lescluze;
and the presence of his son would have been embarrassing.

“You’ll be back for lunch?” he called to George, who still lounged on
the terrace in pyjamas.

“Rather.?That is, unless mother makes a point ... in case she’s
leaving.”

“Oh, of course,” said Campton with grim cordiality.

“You see, dear old boy, I’ve got to see Uncle Andy some time....” It was
the grotesque name that George, in his babyhood, had given to Mr. Brant,
and when he grew up it had been difficult to substitute another.
“Especially now??” George added, pulling himself up out of his chair.

“Now?”

They looked at each other in silence, irritation in the father’s eye,
indulgent amusement in the son’s.

“Why, if you and I are really off on this long trek??”

“Oh, of course,” agreed Campton, relieved. “You’d much better lunch with
them. I always want you to do what’s decent.” He paused on the threshold
to add: “By the way, don’t forget Adele.”

“Well, rather not,” his son responded. “And we’ll keep the evening free
for something awful.”

As he left the room he heard George rapping on the telephone and calling
out Miss Anthony’s number.

Campton had to have reassurance at any price; and he got it, as usual,
irrationally but irresistibly, through his eyes. The mere fact that the
midsummer sun lay so tenderly on Paris, that the bronze dolphins of the
fountains in the square were spraying the Nereids’ Louis Philippe
chignons as playfully as ever; that the sleepy Cities of France dozed as
heavily on their thrones, and the Horses of Marly pranced as fractiously
on their pedestals; that the glorious central setting of the city lay
there in its usual mellow pomp?all this gave him a sense of security
that no crisscrossing of Reuters and Havases could shake.

Nevertheless, he reflected that there was no use in battling with the
silly hysterical crowd he would be sure to encounter at Cook’s; and
having left word with the hotel-porter to secure two “sleepings” on the
Naples express, he drove to the studio.

On the way, as his habit was, he thought hard of his model: everything
else disappeared like a rolled-up curtain, and his inner vision centred
itself on the little yellow face he was to paint.

Peering through her cobwebby window, he saw old Mme. Lebel on the watch.
He knew she wanted to pounce out and ask if there would be war; and
composing his most taciturn countenance he gave her a preoccupied nod
and hurried by.

The studio looked grimy and disordered, and he remembered that he had
intended, the evening before, to come back and set it to rights. In
pursuance of this plan, he got out a canvas, fussed with his brushes and
colours, and then tried once more to make the place tidy. But his
attempts at order always resulted in worse confusion; the fact had been
one of Julia’s grievances against him, and he had often thought that a
reaction from his ways probably explained the lifeless neatness of the
Anderson Brant drawing-room.

Campton had fled to Montmartre to escape a number of things: first of
all, the possibility of meeting people who would want to talk about the
European situation, then of being called up by Mrs. Brant, and lastly of
having to lunch alone in a fashionable restaurant. In his morbid dread
of seeing people he would have preferred an omelette in the studio, if
only Mariette had been at hand to make it; and he decided, after a vain
struggle with his muddled “properties,” to cross over to the Luxembourg
quarter and pick up a meal in a wine-shop.

He did not own to himself his secret reason for this decision; but it
caused him, after a glance at his watch, to hasten his steps down the
rue Montmartre and bribe a passing taxi to carry him to the Museum of
the Luxembourg. He reached it ten minutes before the midday closing, and
hastening past the serried statues, turned into a room half-way down the
gallery. Whistler’s Mother and the Carmencita of Sargent wondered at
each other from its walls; and on the same wall with the Whistler hung
the picture Campton had come for: his portrait of his son. He had given
it to the Luxembourg the day after Mr. Brant had tried to buy it, with
the object of inflicting the most cruel slight he could think of on the
banker.

In the generous summer light the picture shone out on him with a
communicative warmth: never had he seen so far into its depths. “No
wonder,” he thought, “it opened people’s eyes to what I was trying for.”

He stood and stared his own eyes full, mentally comparing the features
before him with those of the firmer harder George he had left on the
terrace of the Crillon, and noting how time, while fulfilling the rich
promise of the younger face, had yet taken something from its
brightness.

Campton, at that moment, found more satisfaction than ever in thinking
how it must have humiliated Brant to have the picture given to France.
“He could have understood my keeping it myself?or holding it for a
bigger price?but _giving it_??!” The satisfaction was worth the
sacrifice of the best record he would ever have of that phase of his
son’s youth. At various times afterward he had tried for the same
George, but not one of his later studies had that magic light on it.
Still, he was glad he had given the picture. It was safe, safer than it
would have been with him. His great dread had always been that if his
will were mislaid (and his things were always getting mislaid) the
picture might be sold, and fall into Brant’s hands after his death.

The closing signal drove him out of the Museum, and he turned into the
first wine-shop. He had advised George to lunch with the Brants, but
there was disappointment in his heart. Seeing the turn things were
taking, he had hoped the boy would feel the impulse to remain with him.
But, after all, at such a time a son could not refuse to go to his
mother. Campton pictured the little party of three grouped about the
luncheon-table in the high cool dining-room of the Avenue Marigny, with
the famous Hubert Robert panels, and the Louis XV silver and Sevres;
while he, the father, George’s father, sat alone at the soiled table of
a frowsy wine-shop.

Well?it was he who had so willed it. Life was too crazy a muddle?and who
could have foreseen that he might have been repaid for twenty-six years
with such a wife by keeping an undivided claim on such a son?

His meal over, he hastened back to the studio, hoping to find the dancer
there. Fortin-Lescluze had sworn to bring her at two, and Campton was
known to exact absolute punctuality. He had put the final touch to his
fame by refusing to paint the mad young Duchesse de la Tour Crenelee?who
was exceptionally paintable?because she had kept him waiting
three-quarters of an hour. But now, though it was nearly three, and the
dancer and her friend had not come, Campton dared not move, lest he
should miss Fortin-Lescluze.

“Sent for by a rich patient in a war-funk; or else hanging about in the
girl’s dressing-room while she polishes her toe-nails,” Campton
reflected; and sulkily sat down to wait.

He had never been willing to have a telephone. To him it was a live
thing, a kind of Laocoon-serpent that caught one in its coils and
dragged one struggling to the receiver. His friends had spent all their
logic in trying to argue away this belief; but he answered obstinately:
“Every one would be sure to call me up when Mariette was out.” Even the
Russian lady, during her brief reign, had pleaded in vain on this point.

He would have given a good deal now if he had listened to her. The
terror of having to cope with small material difficulties, always
strongest in him in moments of artistic inspiration?when the hushed
universe seemed hardly big enough to hold him and his model?this dread
anchored him to his seat while he tried to make up his mind to send Mme.
Lebel to the nearest telephone-station.

If he called to her, she would instantly begin: “And the war, sir?” And
he would have to settle that first. Besides, if he did not telephone
himself he could not make sure of another appointment with
Fortin-Lescluze. But the idea of battling alone with the telephone in a
public place covered his large body with a damp distress. If only George
had been in reach!

He waited till four, and then, furious, locked the studio and went down.
Mme. Lebel still sat in her spidery den. She looked at him gravely,
their eyes met, they exchanged a bow, but she did not move or speak. She
was busy as usual with some rusty sewing?he thought it odd that she
should not rush out to waylay him. Everything that day was odd.

He found all the telephone-booths besieged. The people waiting were
certainly bad cases of war-funk, to judge from their looks; after
scrutinizing them for a while he decided to return to his hotel, and try
to communicate with Fortin-Lescluze from there.

To his annoyance there was not a taxi to be seen. He limped down the
slope of Montmartre to the nearest metro-station, and just as he was
preparing to force his lame bulk into a crowded train, caught sight of a
solitary horse-cab: a vehicle he had not risked himself in for years.

The cab-driver, for gastronomic reasons, declined to take him farther
than the Madeleine; and getting out there, Campton walked along the rue
Royale. Everything still looked wonderfully as usual; and the fountains
in the Place sparkled gloriously.

Comparatively few people were about: he was surprised to see how few. A
small group of them, he noticed, had paused near the doorway of the
Ministry of Marine, and were looking?without visible excitement?at a
white paper pasted on the wall.

He crossed the street and looked too. In the middle of the paper, in
queer Gothic-looking characters, he saw the words

=“Les Armees De Terre et De Mer....”=

War had come??

He knew now that he had never for an instant believed it possible. Even
when he had had that white-lipped interview with the Brants, even when
he had planned to take Fortin-Lescluze by his senile infatuation, and
secure a medical certificate for George; even then, he had simply been
obeying the superstitious impulse which makes a man carry his umbrella
when he goes out on a cloudless morning.

War had come.

He stood on the edge of the sidewalk, and tried to think?now that it was
here?what it really meant: that is, what it meant to him. Beyond that he
had no intention of venturing. “This is not our job anyhow,” he
muttered, repeating the phrase with which he had bolstered up his talk
with Julia.

But abstract thinking was impossible: his confused mind could only
snatch at a few drifting scraps of purpose. “Let’s be practical,” he
said to himself.

The first thing to do was to get back to the hotel and call up the
physician. He strode along at his fastest limp, suddenly contemptuous of
the people who got in his way.

“War?and they’ve nothing to do but dawdle and gape! How like the
French!” He found himself hating the French.

He remembered that he had asked to have his sleepings engaged for the
following night. But even if he managed to secure his son’s discharge,
there could be no thought, now, of George’s leaving the country; and he
stopped at the desk to cancel the order.

There was no one behind the desk: one would have said that confusion
prevailed in the hall, if its emptiness had not made the word
incongruous. At last a waiter with rumpled hair strayed out of the
restaurant, and of him, imperiously, Campton demanded the concierge.

“The concierge? He’s gone.”

“To get my places for Naples?”

The waiter looked blank. “Gone: mobilised?to join his regiment. It’s the
war.”

“But look here, some one must have attended to getting my places, I
suppose,” cried Campton wrathfully. He invaded the inner office and
challenged a secretary who was trying to deal with several unmanageable
travellers, but who explained to him, patiently, that his sleepings had
certainly not been engaged, as no trains were leaving Paris for the
present. “Not for civilian travel,” he added, still more patiently.

Campton had a sudden sense of suffocation. No trains leaving Paris “for
the present”? But then people like himself?people who had nothing on
earth to do with the war?had been caught like rats in a trap! He
reflected with a shiver that Mrs. Brant would not be able to return to
Deauville, and would probably insist on his coming to see her every day.
He asked: “How long is this preposterous state of things to last?”?but
no one answered, and he stalked to the lift and had himself carried
upstairs.

He was confident that George would be there waiting; but the
sitting-room was empty. He felt as if he were on a desert island, with
the last sail disappearing over the dark rim of the world.

After much vain ringing he got into communication with Fortin’s house,
and heard a confused voice saying that the physician had already left
Paris.

“Left?for where? For how long?”

And then the eternal answer: “The doctor is mobilised. _It’s the war._”

Mobilised?already? Within the first twenty-four hours? A man of Fortin’s
age and authority? Campton was terrified by the uncanny rapidity with
which events were moving, he whom haste had always confused and
disconcerted, as if there were a secret link between his lameness and
the movements of his will. He rang up Dastrey, but no one answered.
Evidently his friend was out, and his friend’s _bonne_ also. “I suppose
_she’s_ mobilised: they’ll be mobilising the women next.”

At last, from sheer over-agitation, his fatigued mind began to move more
deliberately: he collected his wits, laboured with his more immediate
difficulties, and decided that he would go to Fortin-Lescluze’s house,
on the chance that the physician had not, after all, really started.

“Ten to one he won’t go till to-morrow,” Campton reasoned.

The hall of the hotel was emptier than ever, and no taxi was in sight
down the whole length of the rue Royale, or the rue Boissy d’Anglas, or
the rue de Rivoli: not even a horse-cab showed against the deserted
distances. He crossed to the metro, and painfully descended its many
stairs.




                                   VI


Campton, proffering twenty francs to an astonished maid-servant, learned
that, yes, to his intimates?and of course Monsieur was one??the doctor
_was_ in, was in fact dining, and did not leave till the next morning.

“Dining?at six o’clock?”

“Monsieur’s son, Monsieur Jean, is starting at once for his depot.
That’s the reason.”

Campton sent in his card. He expected to be received in the so-called
“studio,” a lofty room with Chinese hangings, Renaissance choir-stalls,
organ, grand piano, and post-impressionist paintings, where
Fortin-Lescluze received the celebrities of the hour. Mme. Fortin never
appeared there, and Campton associated the studio with amusing talk,
hot-house flowers, and ladies lolling on black velvet divans. He
supposed that the physician was separated from his wife, and that she
had a home of her own.

When the maid reappeared she did not lead him to the studio, but into a
small dining-room with the traditional Henri II sideboard of waxed
walnut, a hanging table-lamp under a beaded shade, an India-rubber plant
on a plush pedestal, and napkins that were just being restored to their
bone rings by the four persons seated about the red-and-white checkered
table-cloth.

These were: the great man himself, a tall large woman with grey hair, a
tiny old lady, her face framed in a peasant’s fluted cap, and a plain
young man wearing a private’s uniform, who had a nose like the doctor’s
and simple light blue eyes.

The two ladies and the young man?so much more interesting to the
painter’s eye than the sprawling beauties of the studio?were introduced
by Fortin-Lescluze as his wife, his mother and his son. Mme. Fortin
said, in a deep alto, a word or two about the privilege of meeting the
famous painter who had portrayed her husband, and the old mother, in a
piping voice, exclaimed: “Monsieur, I was at Sedan in 1870. I saw the
Germans. I saw the Emperor sitting on a bench. He was crying.”

“My mother’s heard everything, she’s seen everything. There’s no one in
the world like my mother!” the physician said, laying his hand on hers.

“You won’t see the Germans again, _ma bonne mere_!” her daughter-in-law
added, smiling.

Campton took coffee with them, bore with a little inevitable talk about
the war, and then eagerly questioned the son. The young man was a
chemist, a _preparateur_ in the laboratory of the Institut Pasteur. He
was also, it appeared, given to prehistoric archæology, and had written
a “thesis” on the painted caves of the Dordogne. He seemed extremely
serious, and absorbed in questions of science and letters. But it
appeared to him perfectly simple to be leaving it all in a few hours to
join his regiment. “The war had to come. This sort of thing couldn’t go
on,” he said, in the words of Mme. Lebel.

He was to start in an hour, and Campton excused himself for intruding on
the family, who seemed as happily united, as harmonious in their deeper
interests, as if no musical studio-parties and exotic dancers had ever
absorbed the master of the house.

Campton, looking at the group, felt a pang of envy, and thought, for the
thousandth time, how frail a screen of activity divided him from depths
of loneliness he dared not sound. “‘For every man hath business and
desire,’” he muttered as he followed the physician.

In the consulting-room he explained: “It’s about my son??”

He had not been able to bring the phrase out in the presence of the
young man who must have been just George’s age, and who was leaving in
an hour for his regiment. But between Campton and the father there were
complicities, and there might therefore be accommodations. In the
consulting-room one breathed a lower air.

It was not that Campton wanted to do anything underhand. He was
genuinely anxious about George’s health. After all, tuberculosis did not
disappear in a month or even a year: his anxiety was justified. And then
George, but for the stupid accident of his birth, would never have been
mixed up in the war. Campton felt that he could make his request with
his head high.

Fortin-Lescluze seemed to think so too; at any rate he expressed no
surprise. But could anything on earth have surprised him, after thirty
years in that confessional of a room?

The difficulty was that he did not see his way to doing anything?not
immediately, at any rate.

“You must let the boy join his base. He leaves to-morrow? Give me the
number of his regiment and the name of the town, and trust me to do what
I can.”

“But you’re off yourself?”

“Yes: I’m being sent to a hospital at Lyons. But I’ll leave you my
address.”

Campton lingered, unable to take this as final. He looked about him
uneasily, and then, for a moment, straight into the physician’s eyes.

“You must know how I feel; your boy is an only son, too.”

“Yes, yes,” the father assented, in the absent-minded tone of
professional sympathy. But Campton felt that he felt the deep
difference.

“Well, goodbye?and thanks.”

As Campton turned to go the physician laid a hand on his shoulder and
spoke with sudden fierce emotion. “Yes: Jean is an only son?an only
child. For his mother and myself it’s not a trifle?having our only son
in the war.”

There was no allusion to the dancer, no hint that Fortin remembered her;
it was Campton who lowered his gaze before the look in the other
father’s eyes.




                                  VII


“A son in the war??”

The words followed Campton down the stairs. What did it mean, and what
must it feel like, for parents in this safe denationalized modern world
to be suddenly saying to each other with white lips: A son in the war?

He stood on the kerbstone, staring ahead of him and forgetting whither
he was bound. The world seemed to lie under a spell, and its weight was
on his limbs and brain. Usually any deep inward trouble made him more
than ever alive to the outward aspect of things; but this new world in
which people talked glibly of sons in the war had suddenly become
invisible to him, and he did not know where he was, or what he was
staring at. He noted the fact, and remembered a story of St. Bernard?he
thought it was?walking beside a beautiful lake in supersensual ecstasy,
and saying afterward: “Was there a lake? I didn’t see it.”

On the way back to the hotel he passed the American Embassy, and had a
vague idea of trying to see the Ambassador and find out if the United
States were not going to devise some way of evading the tyrannous
regulation that bound young Americans to France. “And they call this a
free country!” he heard himself exclaiming.

The remark sounded exactly like one of Julia’s, and this reminded him
that the Ambassador frequently dined at the Brants’. They had certainly
not left his door untried; and since, to the Brant circles, Campton was
still a shaggy Bohemian, his appeal was not likely to fortify theirs.

His mind turned to Jorgenstein, and the vast web of the speculator’s
financial relations. But, after all, France was on the verge of war, if
not in it; and following up the threads of the Jorgenstein web was
likely to land one in Frankfort or Vienna.

At the hotel he found his sitting-room empty; but presently the door
opened and George came in laden with books, fresh yellow and grey ones
in Flammarion wrappers.

“Hullo, Dad,” he said; and added: “So the silly show is on.”

“Mobilisation is not war??,” said Campton.

“No??”

“What on earth are all those books?”

“Provender. It appears we may rot at the depot for weeks. I’ve just seen
a chap who’s in my regiment.”

Campton felt a sudden relief. The purchase of the books proved that
George was fairly sure he would not be sent to the front. His father
went up to him and tapped him on the chest.

“How about this???” He wanted to add: “I’ve just seen Fortin, who says
he’ll get you off”; but though George’s eye was cool and unenthusiastic
it did not encourage such confidences.

“Oh?lungs? I imagine I’m sound again.” He paused, and stooped to turn
over the books. Carelessly, he added: “But then the stethoscope may
think differently. Nothing to do but wait and see.”

“Of course,” Campton agreed.

It was clear that the boy hated what was ahead of him; and what more
could his father ask? Of course he was not going to confess to a desire
to shirk his duty; but it was easy to see that his whole lucid
intelligence repudiated any sympathy with the ruinous adventure.

“Have you seen Adele?” Campton enquired, and George replied that he had
dropped in for five minutes, and that Miss Anthony wanted to see his
father.

“Is she?nervous?”

“Old Adele? I should say not: she’s fighting mad. _La Revanche_ and all
the rest of it. She doesn’t realize?_sancta simplicitas!_”

“Oh, I can see Adele throwing on the faggots!”

Father and son were silent, both busy lighting cigarettes. When George’s
was lit he remarked: “Well, if we’re not called at once it’ll be a good
chance to read ‘The Golden Bough’ right through.”

Campton stared, not knowing the book even by name. What a queer
changeling the boy was! But George’s composure, his deep and genuine
indifference to the whole political turmoil, once more fortified his
father.

“Have they any news??” he ventured. “They,” in their private language,
meant the Brants.

“Oh, yes, lots: Uncle Andy was stiff with it. But not really amounting
to anything. Of course there’s no doubt there’ll be war.”

“How about England?”

“Nobody knows; but the bankers seem to think England’s all right.”
George paused, and finally added: “Look here, dear old boy?before she
leaves I think mother wants to see you.”

Campton hardened instantly. “She _has_ seen me?yesterday.”

“I know; she told me.”

The son began to cut the pages of one of his books with a visiting-card
he had picked up, and the father stood looking out on the Place de la
Concorde through the leafy curtain of the terrace.

Campton knew that he could not refuse his son’s request; in his heart of
hearts he was glad it had been made, since it might mean that “they” had
found a way?perhaps through the Ambassador.

But he could never prevent a stiffening of his whole self at any summons
or suggestion from the Brants. He thought of the seeming unity of the
Fortin-Lescluze couple, and of the background of peaceful family life
revealed by the scene about the checkered table-cloth. Perhaps that was
one of the advantages of a social organization which still, as a whole,
ignored divorce, and thought any private condonation better than the
open breaking up of the family.

“All right; I’ll go??” he agreed. “Where are we dining?”

“Oh, I forgot?an awful orgy. Dastrey wants us at the Union. Louis
Dastrey is dining with him, and he let me ask Boylston??”

“Boylston???”

“You don’t know him. A chap who was at Harvard with me. He’s out here
studying painting at the Beaux Arts. He’s an awfully good sort, and he
wanted to see me before I go.”

The father’s heart sank. Only one whole day more with his boy, and this
last evening but one was to be spent with poor embittered Dastrey, and
two youths, one unknown to Campton, who would drown them in stupid
war-chatter! But it was what George wanted; and there must not be a
shade, for George, on these last hours.

“All right! You promised me something awful for to-night,” Campton
grinned sardonically.

“Do you mind? I’m sorry.”

“It’s only Dastrey’s damned chauvinism that I mind. Why don’t you ask
Adele to join the chorus?”

“Well?you’ll like Boylston,” said George.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Dastrey, after all, turned out less tragic and aggressive than Campton
had feared. His irritability had vanished, and though he was very grave
he seemed preoccupied only with the fate of Europe, and not with his
personal stake in the affair.

But the older men said little. The youngsters had the floor, and
Campton, as he listened to George and young Louis Dastrey, was overcome
by a sense of such dizzy unreality that he had to grasp the arms of his
ponderous leather armchair to assure himself that he was really in the
flesh and in the world.

What! Two days ago they were still in the old easy Europe, a Europe in
which one could make plans, engage passages on trains and steamers,
argue about pictures, books, theatres, ideas, draw as much money as one
chose out of the bank, and say: “The day after to-morrow I’ll be in
Berlin or Vienna or Belgrade.” And here they sat in their same evening
clothes, about the same shining mahogany writing-table, apparently the
same group of free and independent youths and elderly men, and in
reality prisoners, every one of them, hand-cuffed to this hideous masked
bully of “War”!

The young men were sure that the conflict was inevitable?the evening
papers left no doubt of it?and there was much animated discussion
between young Dastrey and George.

Already their views diverged; the French youth, theoretically at one
with his friend as to the senselessness of war in general, had at once
resolutely disengaged from the mist of doctrine the fatal necessity of
this particular war.

“It’s the old festering wound of Alsace-Lorraine: Bismarck foresaw it
and feared it?or perhaps planned it and welcomed it: who knows? But as
long as the wound was there, Germany believed that France would try to
avenge it, and as long as Germany believed that, she had to keep up her
own war-strength; and she’s kept it up to the toppling-over point,
ruining herself and us. That’s the whole thing, as I see it. War’s rot;
but to get rid of war forever we’ve got to fight this one first.”

It was wonderful to Campton that this slender learned youth should
already have grasped the necessity of the conflict and its deep causes.
While his own head was still spinning with wrath and bewilderment at the
bottomless perversity of mankind, Louis Dastrey had analyzed and
accepted the situation and his own part in it. And he was not simply
resigned; he was trembling with eagerness to get the thing over. “If
only England is with us we’re safe?it’s a matter of weeks,” he declared.

“Wait a bit?wait a bit; I want to know more about a whole lot of things
before I fix a date for the fall of Berlin,” his uncle interposed; but
Louis flung him a radiant look. “We’ve been there before, my uncle!”

“But there’s Russia too??” said Boylston explosively. He had not spoken
before.

“‘_Nous l’avons eu, votre Rhin allemand_,’” quoted George, as he poured
a golden Hock into his glass.

He was keenly interested, that was evident; but interested as a
looker-on, a dilettante. He had neither Valmy nor Sedan in his blood,
and it was as a sympathizing spectator that he ought by rights to have
been sharing his friend’s enthusiasm, not as a combatant compelled to
obey the same summons. Campton, glancing from one to another of their
brilliant faces, felt his determination harden to save George from the
consequences of his parents’ stupid blunder.

After dinner young Dastrey proposed a music-hall. The audience would be
a curious sight: there would be wild enthusiasm, and singing of the
Marseillaise. The other young men agreed, but their elders, after a
tacitly exchanged glance, decided to remain at the club, on the plea
that some one at the Ministry of War had promised to telephone if there
were fresh news.

Campton and Dastrey, left alone, stood on the balcony watching the
Boulevards. The streets, so deserted during the day, had become suddenly
and densely populated. Hardly any vehicles were in sight: the motor
omnibuses were already carrying troops to the stations, there was a
report abroad that private motors were to be requisitioned, and only a
few taxis and horse-cabs, packed to the driver’s box with young men in
spick-and-span uniforms, broke through the mass of pedestrians which
filled the whole width of the Boulevards. This mass moved slowly and
vaguely, swaying this way and that, as though it awaited a portent from
the heavens. In the glare of electric lamps and glittering
theatre-fronts the innumerable faces stood out vividly, grave, intent,
slightly bewildered. Except when the soldiers passed no cries or songs
came from the crowd, but only the deep inarticulate rumour which any
vast body of people gives forth.

“Queer??! How silent they are: how do you think they’re taking it?”
Campton questioned.

But Dastrey had grown belligerent again. He saw the throngs before him
bounding toward the frontier like the unchained furies of Rude’s
“Marseillaise”; whereas to Campton they seemed full of the dumb wrath of
an orderly and laborious people upon whom an unrighteous quarrel has
been forced. He knew that the thought of Alsace-Lorraine still stirred
in French hearts; but all Dastrey’s eloquence could not convince him
that these people wanted war, or would have sought it had it not been
thrust on them. The whole monstrous injustice seemed to take shape
before him, and to brood like a huge sky-filling dragon of the northern
darknesses over his light-loving, pleasure-loving, labour-loving France.

                  *       *       *       *       *

George came home late.

It was two in the morning of his last day with his boy when Campton
heard the door open, and saw a flash of turned on light.

All night he had lain staring into the darkness, and thinking, thinking:
thinking of George’s future, George’s friends, George and women, of that
unknown side of his boy’s life which, in this great upheaval of things,
had suddenly lifted its face to the surface. If war came, if George were
not discharged, if George were sent to the front, if George were killed,
how strange to think that things the father did not know of might turn
out to have been the central things of his son’s life!

The young man came in, and Campton looked at him as though he were a
stranger.

“Hullo, Dad?any news from the Ministry?” George, tossing aside his hat
and stick, sat down on the bed. He had a crumpled rose in his
button-hole, and looked gay and fresh, with the indestructible freshness
of youth.

“What do I really know of him?” the father asked himself.

Yes: Dastrey had had news. Germany had already committed acts of overt
hostility on the frontier: telegraph and telephone communications had
been cut, French locomotives seized, troops massed along the border on
the specious pretext of the “_Kriegsgefahr-zustand_.” It was war.

“Oh, well,” George shrugged. He lit a cigarette, and asked: “What did
you think of Boylston?”

“Boylston???”

“The fat brown chap at dinner.”

“Yes?yes?of course.” Campton became aware that he had not thought of
Boylston at all, had hardly been aware of his presence. But the
painter’s registering faculty was always latently at work, and in an
instant he called up a round face, shyly jovial, with short-sighted
brown eyes as sharp as needles, and dark hair curling tightly over a
wide watchful forehead.

“Why?I liked him.”

“I’m glad, because it was a tremendous event for him, seeing you. He
paints, and he’s been keen on your things for years.”

“I wish I’d known.... Why didn’t he say so? He didn’t say anything, did
he?”

“No: he doesn’t, much, when he’s pleased. He’s the very best chap I
know,” George concluded.




                                  VIII


That morning the irrevocable stared at him from the head-lines of the
papers. The German Ambassador was recalled. Germany had declared war on
France at 6.40 the previous evening; there was an unintelligible
allusion, in the declaration, to French aeroplanes throwing bombs on
Nuremberg and Wesel. Campton read that part of the message over two or
three times.

Aeroplanes throwing bombs? Aeroplanes as engines of destruction? He had
always thought of them as a kind of giant kite that fools went up in
when they were tired of breaking their necks in other ways. But
aeroplane bombardment as a cause for declaring war? The bad faith of it
was so manifest that he threw down the papers half relieved. Of course
there would be a protest on the part of the allies; a great country like
France would not allow herself to be bullied into war on such a pretext.

The ultimatum to Belgium was more serious; but Belgium’s gallant reply
would no doubt check Germany on that side. After all, there was such a
thing as international law, and Germany herself had recognized it.... So
his mind spun on in vain circles, while under the frail web of his
casuistry gloomed the obstinate fact that George was mobilised, that
George was to leave the next morning.

The day wore on: it was the shortest and yet most interminable that
Campton had ever known. Paris, when he went out into it, was more
dazzlingly empty than ever. In the hotel, in the hall, on the stairs, he
was waylaid by flustered compatriots?“Oh, Mr. Campton, you don’t know
me, but of course all Americans know _you_!”?who appealed to him for the
very information he was trying to obtain for himself: how one could get
money, how one could get hold of the concierge, how one could send
cables, if there was any restaurant where the waiters had not all been
mobilised, if he had any “pull” at the Embassy, or at any of the
steamship offices, or any of the banks. One disordered beauty blurted
out: “Of course, with your connection with Bullard and Brant”?and was
only waked to her mistake by Campton’s indignant stare, and his plunge
past her while she called out excuses.

But the name acted as a reminder of his promise to go and see Mrs.
Brant, and he decided to make his visit after lunch, when George would
be off collecting last things. Visiting the Brants with George would
have been beyond his capacity.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The great drawing-rooms, their awnings spread against the sun, their
tall windows wide to the glow of the garden, were empty when he entered;
but in a moment he was joined by a tall angular woman with a veil pushed
up untidily above her pink nose. Campton reflected that he had never
seen Adele Anthony in the daytime without a veil pushed up above a
flushed nose, and dangling in irregular wisps from the back of a small
hard hat of which the shape never varied.

“Julia will be here in a minute. When she told me you were coming I
waited.”

He was glad to have a word with her before meeting Mrs. Brant, though
his impulse had been almost as strong to avoid the one as the other. He
dreaded belligerent bluster as much as vain whimpering, and in the
depths of his soul he had to own that it would have been easier to talk
to Mr. Brant than to either of the women.

“Julia is powdering her nose,” Miss Anthony continued. “She has an idea
that if you see she’s been crying you’ll be awfully angry.”

Campton made an impatient gesture. “If I were?much it would matter!”

“Ah, but you might tell George; and George is not to know.” She paused,
and then bounced round on him abruptly. She always moved and spoke in
explosions, as if the wires that agitated her got tangled, and then were
too suddenly jerked loose.

“_Does_ George know?”

“About his mother’s tears?”

“About this plan you’re all hatching to have him discharged?”

Campton reddened under her lashless blue gaze, and the consciousness of
doing so made his answer all the curter.

“Probably not?unless you’ve told him!”

The shot appeared to reach the mark, for an answering blush suffused her
sallow complexion. “You’d better not put ideas into my head!” she
laughed. Something in her tone reminded him of all her old dogged
loyalties, and made him ashamed of his taunt.

“Anyhow,” he grumbled, “his place is not in the French army.”

“That was for you and Julia to decide twenty-six years ago, wasn’t it?
Now it’s up to him.”

Her capricious adoption of American slang, fitted anyhow into her
old-fashioned and punctilious English, sometimes amused but oftener
exasperated Campton.

“If you’re going to talk modern slang you ought to give up those
ridiculous stays, and not wear a fringe like a mid-Victorian royalty,”
he jeered, trying to laugh off his exasperation.

She let this pass with a smile. “Well, I wish I could find the language
to make you understand how much better it would be to leave George
alone. This war will be the making of him.”

“He’s made quite to my satisfaction as it is, thanks. But what’s the use
of talking? You always get your phrases out of books.”

The door opened, and Mrs. Brant came in.

Her appearance answered to Miss Anthony’s description. A pearly mist
covered her face, and some reviving liquid had cleared her congested
eyes. Her poor hands had suddenly grown so thin and dry that the heavy
rings, slipping down to the joints, slid back into place as she shook
hands with Campton.

“Thank you for coming,” she said.

“Oh??” he protested, helpless, and disturbed by Miss Anthony’s presence.
At the moment his former wife’s feelings were more intelligible to him
than his friend’s: the maternal fibre stirred in her, and made her more
appealing than any elderly virgin on the war-path.

“I’m off, my dears,” said the elderly virgin, as if guessing his
thought. Her queer shallow eyes included them both in a sweeping glance,
and she flung back from the threshold: “Be careful of what you say to
George.”

What they had to say to each other did not last many minutes. The Brants
had made various efforts, but had been baffled on all sides by the
general agitation and confusion. In high quarters the people they wanted
to see were inaccessible; and those who could be reached lent but a
distracted ear. The Ambassador had at once declared that he could do
nothing; others vaguely promised they “would see”?but hardly seemed to
hear what they were being asked.

“And meanwhile time is passing?and he’s going!” Mrs. Brant lamented.

The reassurance that Campton brought from Fortin-Lescluze, vague though
it was, came to her as a miraculous promise, and raised Campton suddenly
in her estimation. She looked at him with a new confidence, and he could
almost hear her saying to Brant, as he had so often heard her say to
himself: “You never seem able to get anything done. I don’t know how
other people manage.”

Her gratitude gave him the feeling of having been engaged in something
underhand and pusillanimous. He made haste to take leave, after
promising to pass on any word he might receive from the physician; but
he reminded her that he was not likely to hear anything till George had
been for some days at his base.

She acknowledged the probability of this, and clung to him with trustful
eyes. She was much disturbed by the preposterous fact that the
Government had already requisitioned two of the Brant motors, and
Campton had an idea that, dazzled by his newly-developed capacity to
“manage,” she was about to implore him to rescue from the clutches of
the authorities her Rolls-Royce and Anderson’s Delaunay.

He was hastening to leave when the door again opened. A rumpled-looking
maid peered in, evidently perplexed, and giving way doubtfully to a
young woman who entered with a rush, and then paused as if she too were
doubtful. She was pretty in an odd dishevelled way, and with her
elaborate clothes and bewildered look she reminded Campton of a
fashion-plate torn from its page and helplessly blown about the world.
He had seen the same type among his compatriots any number of times in
the last days.

“Oh, Mrs. Brant?yes, I _know_ you gave orders that you were not in to
anybody, but I just wouldn’t listen, and it’s not that poor woman’s
fault,” the visitor began, in a plaintive staccato which matched her sad
eyes and her fluttered veils.

“You see, I simply had to get hold of Mr. Brant, because I’m here
without a penny?literally!” She dangled before them a bejewelled
mesh-bag. “And in a hotel where they don’t know me. And at the bank they
wouldn’t listen to me, and they said Mr. Brant wasn’t there, though of
course I suppose he was; so I said to the cashier: ‘Very well, then,
I’ll simply go to the Avenue Marigny and batter in his door?unless you’d
rather I jumped into the Seine?’”

“Oh, Mrs. Talkett??” murmured Mrs. Brant.

“Really: it’s a case of my money or my life!” the young lady continued
with a studied laugh. She stood between them, artificial and yet so
artless, conscious of intruding but evidently used to having her
intrusions pardoned; and her large eyes turned interrogatively to
Campton.

“Of course my husband will do all he can for you. I’ll telephone,” said
Mrs. Brant; then, perceiving that her visitor continued to gaze at
Campton, she added: “Oh, no, _this_ is not ... this is Mr. Campton.”

“John Campton? I knew it!” Mrs. Talkett’s eyes became devouring and
brilliant. “Of course I ought to have recognized you at once?from your
photographs. I have one pinned up in my room. But I was so flurried when
I came in.” She detained the painter’s hand. “Do forgive me! For _years_
I’ve dreamed of your doing me ... you see, I paint a little myself ...
but it’s ridiculous to speak of such things now.” She added, as if she
were risking something: “I knew your son at St. Moritz. We saw a great
deal of him there, and in New York last winter.”

“Ah??” said Campton, bowing awkwardly.

“Cursed fools?all women,” he anathematized her on the way downstairs.

In the street, however, he felt grateful to her for reducing Mrs. Brant
to such confusion that she had made no attempt to detain him. His way of
life lay so far apart from his former wife’s that they had hardly ever
been exposed to accidents of the kind, and he saw that Julia’s
embarrassment kept all its freshness.

The fact set him thinking curiously of what her existence had been since
they had parted. She had long since forgotten her youthful art-jargon to
learn others more consonant to her tastes. As the wife of the powerful
American banker she dispensed the costliest hospitality with the simple
air of one who has never learnt that human life may be sustained without
the aid of orchids and champagne. With guests either brought up in the
same convictions or bent on acquiring them she conversed earnestly and
unweariedly about motors, clothes and morals; but perhaps her most
stimulating hours were those brightened by the weekly visit of the
Rector of her parish. With happy untrammelled hands she was now free to
rebuild to her own measure a corner of the huge wicked welter of Paris;
and immediately it became as neat, as empty, as air-tight as her own
immaculate drawing-room. There he seemed to see her, throning year after
year in an awful emptiness of wealth and luxury and respectability,
seeing only dull people, doing only dull things, and fighting feverishly
to defend the last traces of a beauty which had never given her anything
but the tamest and most unprofitable material prosperity.

“She’s never even had the silly kind of success she wanted?poor Julia!”
he mused, wondering that she had been able to put into her life so few
of the sensations which can be bought by wealth and beauty. “And now
what will be left?how on earth will she fit into a war?”

He was sure all her plans had been made for the coming six months: her
week-end sets of heavy millionaires secured for Deauville, and after
that for the shooting at the big chateau near Compiegne, and three weeks
reserved for Biarritz before the return to Paris in January. One of the
luxuries Julia had most enjoyed after her separation from Campton (Adele
had told him) had been that of planning things ahead: Mr. Brant, thank
heaven, was not impulsive. And now here was this black bolt of war
falling among all her carefully balanced arrangements with a crash more
violent than any of Campton’s inconsequences!

As he reached the Place de la Concorde a newsboy passed with the three
o’clock papers, and he bought one and read of the crossing of Luxembourg
and the invasion of Belgium. The Germans were arrogantly acting up to
their menace: heedless of international law, they were driving straight
for France and England by the road they thought the most accessible....

In the hotel he found George, red with rage, devouring the same paper:
the boy’s whole look was changed.

“The howling blackguards! The brigands! This isn’t war?it’s simple
murder!”

The two men stood and stared at each other. “Will England stand it?”
sprang to their lips at the same moment.

Never?never! England would never permit such a violation of the laws
regulating the relations between civilized peoples. They began to say
both together that after all perhaps it was the best thing that could
have happened, since, if there had been the least hesitation or
reluctance in any section of English opinion, this abominable outrage
would instantly sweep it away.

“They’ve been too damned clever for once!” George exulted. “France is
saved?that’s certain anyhow!”

Yes; France was saved if England could put her army into the field at
once. But could she? Oh, for the Channel tunnel at this hour! Would this
lesson at last cure England of her obstinate insularity? Belgium had
announced her intention of resisting; but what was that gallant
declaration worth in face of Germany’s brutal assault? A poor little
country pledged to a guaranteed neutrality could hardly be expected to
hold her frontiers more than forty-eight hours against the most powerful
army in Europe. And what a narrow strip Belgium was, viewed as an
outpost of France!

These thoughts, racing through Campton’s mind, were swept out of it
again by his absorbing preoccupation. What effect would the Belgian
affair have on George’s view of his own participation in the war? For
the first time the boy’s feelings were visibly engaged; his voice shook
as he burst out: “Louis Dastrey’s right: this kind of thing has got to
stop. We shall go straight back to cannibalism if it doesn’t.?God, what
hounds!”

Yes, but?Campton pondered, tried to think up Pacifist arguments,
remembered his own discussion with Paul Dastrey three days before. “My
dear chap, hasn’t France perhaps gone about with a chip on her shoulder?
Saverne, for instance: some people think??”

“Damn Saverne! Haven’t the Germans shown us what they are now? Belgium
sheds all the light _I_ want on Saverne. They’re not fit to live with
white people, and the sooner they’re shown it the better.”

“Well, France and Russia and England are here to show them.”

George laughed. “Yes, and double quick.”

Both were silent again, each thinking his own thoughts. They were
apparently the same, for just as Campton was about to ask where George
had decided that they should take their last dinner, the young man said
abruptly: “Look here, Dad; I’d planned a little tete-a-tete for us this
evening.”

“Yes???”

“Well?I can’t. I’m going to chuck you.” He smiled a little, his colour
rising nervously. “For some people I’ve just run across?who were awfully
kind to me at St. Moritz?and in New York last winter. I didn’t know they
were here till ... till just now. I’m awfully sorry; but I’ve simply got
to dine with them.”

There was a silence. Campton stared out over his son’s shoulder at the
great sunlit square. “Oh, all right,” he said briskly.

This?on George’s last night!

“You don’t mind _much_, do you? I’ll be back early, for a last pow-wow
on the terrace.” George paused, and finally brought out: “You see, it
really wouldn’t have done to tell mother that I was deserting her on my
last evening because I was dining with you!”

A weight was lifted from Campton’s heart, and he felt ashamed of having
failed to guess the boy’s real motive.

“My dear fellow, naturally ... quite right. And you can stop in and see
your mother on the way home. You’ll find me here whenever you turn up.”

George looked relieved. “Thanks a lot?you always know. And now for my
adieux to Adele.”

He went off whistling the waltz from the Rosenkavalier, and Campton
returned to his own thoughts.

                  *       *       *       *       *

He was still revolving them when he went upstairs after a solitary
repast in the confused and servantless dining-room. Adele Anthony had
telephoned to him to come and dine?after seeing George, he supposed; but
he had declined. He wanted to be with his boy, or alone.

As he left the dining-room he ran across Adamson, the American newspaper
correspondent, who had lived for years in Paris and was reputed to have
“inside information.” Adamson was grave but confident. In his opinion
Russia would probably not get to Berlin before November (he smiled at
Campton’s astonished outcry); but if England?oh, they were sure of
England!?could get her army over without delay, the whole business would
very likely be settled before that, in one big battle in Belgium.
(Yes?poor Belgium, indeed!) Anyhow, in the opinion of the military
experts the war was not likely to last more than three or four months;
and of course, even if things went badly on the western front, which was
highly unlikely, there was Russia to clench the business as soon as her
huge forces got in motion. Campton drew much comfort from this sober
view of the situation, midway between that of the optimists who knew
Russia would be in Berlin in three weeks, and of those who saw the
Germans in Calais even sooner. Adamson was a levelheaded fellow, who
weighed what he said and pinned his faith to facts.

Campton managed to evade several people whom he saw lurking for him, and
mounted to his room. On the terrace, alone with the serene city, his
confidence grew, and he began to feel more and more sure that, whatever
happened, George was likely to be kept out of the fighting till the
whole thing was over. With such formidable forces closing in on her it
was fairly obvious that Germany must succumb before half or even a
quarter of the allied reserves had been engaged. Sustained by the
thought, he let his mind hover tenderly over George’s future, and the
effect on his character of this brief and harmless plunge into a
military career.




                                   IX


George was gone.

When, with a last whistle and scream, his train had ploughed its way out
of the clanging station; when the last young figures clinging to the
rear of the last carriage had vanished, and the bare rails again
glittered up from the cindery tracks, Campton turned and looked about
him.

All the platforms of the station were crowded as he had seldom seen any
place crowded, and to his surprise he found himself taking in every
detail of the scene with a morbid accuracy of observation. He had
discovered, during these last days, that his artist’s vision had been
strangely unsettled. Sometimes, as when he had left Fortin’s house, he
saw nothing: the material world, which had always tugged at him with a
thousand hands, vanished and left him in the void. Then again, as at
present, he saw everything, saw it too clearly, in all its superfluous
and negligible reality, instead of instinctively selecting, and
disregarding what was not to his purpose.

Faces, faces?they swarmed about him, and his overwrought vision
registered them one by one. Especially he noticed the faces of the
women, women of all ages, all classes. These were the wives, mothers,
grandmothers, sisters, mistresses of all those heavily laden trainfuls
of French youth. He was struck with the same strong cheerfulness in all:
some pale, some flushed, some serious, but all firmly and calmly
smiling.

One young woman in particular his look dwelt on?a dark girl in a
becoming dress?both because she was so pleasant to see, and because
there was such assurance in her serenity that she did not have to
constrain her lips and eyes, but could trust them to be what she wished.
Yet he saw by the way she clung to the young artilleryman from whom she
was parting that hers were no sisterly farewells.

An immense hum of voices filled the vast glazed enclosure. Campton
caught the phrases flung up to the young faces piled one above another
in the windows?words of motherly admonishment, little jokes, tender
names, mirthful allusions, last callings out: “Write often! Don’t forget
to wrap up your throat.... Remember to send a line to Annette.... Bring
home a Prussian helmet for the children! _On les aura, pas, mon vieux?_”
It was all bright, brave and confident. “If Berlin could only see it!”
Campton thought.

He tried to remember what his own last words to George had been, but
could not; yet his throat felt dry and thirsty, as if he had talked a
great deal. The train vanished in a roar, and he leaned against a pier
to let the crowd flood by, not daring to risk his lameness in such a
turmoil.

Suddenly he heard loud sobs behind him. He turned, and recognized the
hat and hair of the girl whose eyes had struck him. He could not see
them now, for they were buried in her hands and her whole body shook
with woe. An elderly man was trying to draw her away?her father,
probably.

“Come, come, my child??”

“Oh?oh?oh,” she hiccoughed, following blindly.

The people nearest stared at her, and the faces of other women grew
pale. Campton saw tears on the cheeks of an old body in a black bonnet
who might have been his own Mme. Lebel. A pale lad went away weeping.

But they were all afraid, then, all in immediate deadly fear for the
lives of their beloved! The same fear grasped Campton’s heart, a very
present terror, such as he had hardly before imagined. Compared to it,
all that he had felt hitherto seemed as faint as the sensations of a
looker-on. His knees failed him, and he grasped a transverse bar of the
pier.

People were leaving the station in groups of two or three who seemed to
belong to each other; only he was alone. George’s mother had not come to
bid her son goodbye; she had declared that she would rather take leave
of him quietly in her own house than in a crowd of dirty people at the
station. But then it was impossible to conceive of her being up and
dressed and at the Gare de l’Est at five in the morning?and how could
she have got there without her motor? So Campton was alone, in that
crowd which seemed all made up of families.

But no?not all. Ahead of him he saw one woman moving away alone, and
recognized, across the welter of heads, Adele Anthony’s adamantine hat
and tight knob of hair.

Poor Adele! So she had come too?and had evidently failed in her quest,
not been able to fend a way through the crowd, and perhaps not even had
a glimpse of her hero. The thought smote Campton with compunction: he
regretted his sneering words when they had last met, regretted refusing
to dine with her. He wished the barrier of people between them had been
less impenetrable; but for the moment it was useless to try to force a
way through it. He had to wait till the crowd shifted to other
platforms, whence other trains were starting, and by that time she was
lost to sight.

At last he was able to make his way through the throng, and as he came
out of a side entrance he saw her. She appeared to be looking for a
taxi?she waved her sunshade aimlessly. But no one who knew the Gare de
l’Est would have gone around that corner to look for a taxi; least of
all the practical Adele. Besides, Adele never took taxis: she travelled
in the bowels of the earth or on the dizziest omnibus tops.

Campton knew at once that she was waiting for him. He went up to her and
a guilty pink suffused her nose.

“You missed him after all???” he said.

“I?oh, no, I didn’t.”

“You didn’t? But I was with him all the time. We didn’t see you??”

“No, but _I_ saw?distinctly. That was all I went for,” she jerked back.

He slipped his arm through hers. “This crowd terrifies me. I’m glad you
waited for me,” he said.

He saw her pleasure, but she merely answered: “I’m dying of thirst,
aren’t you?”

“Yes?or hunger, or something. Could we find a _laiterie_?”

They found one, and sat down among early clerks and shop-girls, and a
few dishevelled women with swollen faces whom Campton had noticed in the
station. One of them, who sat opposite an elderly man, had drawn out a
pocket mirror and was powdering her nose.

Campton hated to see women powder their noses?one of the few merits with
which he credited Julia Brant was that of never having adopted these
dirty modern fashions, of continuing to make her toilet in private “like
a lady,” as people used to say when he was young. But now the gesture
charmed him, for he had recognized the girl who had been sobbing in the
station.

“How game she is! I like that. But why is she so frightened?” he
wondered. For he saw that her chocolate was untouched, and that the
smile had stiffened on her lips.

Since his talk with Adamson he could not bring himself to be seriously
alarmed. Fear had taken him by the throat for a moment in the station,
at the sound of the girl’s sobs; but already he had thrown it off.
Everybody agreed that the war was sure to be over in a few weeks; even
Dastrey had come round to that view; and with Fortin’s protection, and
the influences Anderson Brant could put in motion, George was surely
safe?as safe at his depot as anywhere else in this precarious world.
Campton poured out Adele’s coffee, and drank off his own as if it had
been champagne.

“Do you know anything about the people George was dining with last
night?” he enquired abruptly.

Miss Anthony knew everything and everybody in the American circle in
Paris; she was a clearing-house of Franco-American gossip, and it was
likely enough that if George had special reasons for wishing to spend
his last evening away from his family she would know why. But the chance
of her knowing what had been kept from him made Campton’s question, as
soon as it was put, seem indiscreet, and he added hastily: “Not that I
want??”

She looked surprised. “No: he didn’t tell me. Some young man’s affair, I
suppose....” She smirked absurdly, her lashless eyes blinking under the
pushed-back veil.

Campton’s mind had already strayed from the question. Nothing bored him
more than Adele doing the “sad dog,” and he was vexed at having given
her such a chance to be silly. What he wanted to know was whether George
had spoken to his old friend about his future?about his own idea of his
situation, and his intentions and wishes in view of the grim chance
which people, with propitiatory vagueness, call “anything happening.”
Had the boy left any word, any message with her for any one? But it was
useless to speculate, for if he had, the old goose, true as steel, would
never betray it by as much as a twitch of her lids. She could look, when
it was a question of keeping a secret, like such an impenetrable idiot
that one could not imagine any one’s having trusted a secret to her.

Campton had no wish to surprise George’s secrets, if the boy had any.
But their parting had been so hopelessly Anglo-Saxon, so curt and
casual, that he would have liked to think his son had left, somewhere, a
message for him, a word, a letter, in case ... in case there was
anything premonitory in the sobbing of that girl at the next table.

But Adele’s pink nose confronted him, as guileless as a rabbit’s, and he
went out with her unsatisfied. They parted at the door of the
restaurant, and Campton went to the studio to see if there were any news
of his maid-servant Mariette. He meant to return to sleep there that
night, and even his simple housekeeping was likely to be troublesome if
Mariette should not arrive.

On the way it occurred to him that he had not yet seen the morning
papers, and he stopped and bought a handful.

Negotiations, hopes, fears, conjectures?but nothing new or definite,
except the insolent fact of Germany’s aggression, and the
almost-certainty of England’s intervention. When he reached the studio
he found Mme. Lebel in her usual place, paler than usual, but with firm
lips and bright eyes. Her three grandsons had left for their depots the
day before: one was in the _Chasseurs Alpins_, and probably already on
his way to Alsace, another in the infantry, the third in the heavy
artillery; she did not know where the two latter were likely to be sent.
Her eldest son, their father, was dead; the second, a man of fifty, and
a cabinetmaker by trade, was in the territorials, and was not to report
for another week. He hoped, before leaving, to see the return of his
wife and little girl, who were in the Ardennes with the wife’s people.
Mme. Lebel’s mind was made up and her philosophy ready for immediate
application.

“It’s terribly hard for the younger people; but it had to be. I come
from Nancy, Monsieur: I remember the German occupation. I understand
better than my daughter-in-law....”

There was no news of Mariette, and small chance of having any for some
days, much less of seeing her. No one could tell how long civilian
travel would be interrupted. Mme. Lebel, moved by her lodger’s plight,
promised to “find some one”; and Campton mounted to the studio.

He had left it only two days before, on the day when he had vainly
waited for Fortin and his dancer; and an abyss already divided him from
that vanished time. Then his little world still hung like a straw above
an eddy; now it was spinning about in the central vortex.

The pictures stood about untidily, and he looked curiously at all those
faces which belonged to the other life. Each bore the mark of its own
immediate passions and interests; not one betrayed the least
consciousness of coming disaster except the face of poor Madame de
Dolmetsch, whose love had enlightened her. Campton began to think of the
future from the painter’s point of view. What a modeller of faces a
great war must be! What would the people who came through it look like,
he wondered.

His bell tinkled, and he turned to answer it. Dastrey, he supposed ...
he had caught a glimpse of his friend across the crowd at the Gare de
l’Est, seeing off his nephew, but had purposely made no sign. He still
wanted to be alone, and above all not to hear war-talk. Mme. Lebel,
however, had no doubt revealed his presence in the studio, and he could
not risk offending Dastrey.

When he opened the door it was a surprise to see there, instead of
Dastrey’s anxious face, the round rosy countenance of a well-dressed
youth with a shock of fair hair above eyes of childish candour.

“Oh?come in,” Campton said, surprised, but divining a compatriot in a
difficulty.

The youth obeyed, blushing his apologies.

“I’m Benny Upsher, sir,” he said, in a tone modest yet confident, as if
the name were an introduction.

“Oh??” Campton stammered, cursing his absent-mindedness and his
unfailing faculty for forgetting names.

“You’re a friend of George’s, aren’t you?” he risked.

“Yes?tremendous. We were at Harvard together?he was two years ahead of
me.”

“Ah?then you’re still there?”

Mr. Upsher’s blush became a mask of crimson. “Well?I thought I was, till
this thing happened.”

“What thing?”

The youth stared at the older man with a look of celestial wonder.

“This war.?George has started already, hasn’t he?”

“Yes. Two hours ago.”

“So they said?I looked him up at the Crillon. I wanted most awfully to
see him; if I had, of course I shouldn’t have bothered you.”

“My dear young man, you’re not bothering me. But what can I do?”

Mr. Upsher’s composure seemed to be returning as the necessary
preliminaries were cleared away. “Thanks a lot,” he said. “Of course
what I’d like best is to join his regiment.”

“Join his regiment?_you_!” Campton exclaimed.

“Oh, I know it’s difficult; I raced up from Biarritz quick as I could to
catch him.” He seemed still to be panting with the effort. “I want to be
in this,” he concluded.

Campton contemplated him with helpless perplexity. “But I don’t
understand?there’s no reason, in your case. With George it was
obligatory?on account of his being born here. But I suppose you were
born in America?”

“Well, I guess so: in Utica. My mother was Madeline Mayhew. I think
we’re a sort of cousins, sir, aren’t we?”

“Of course?of course. Excuse my not recalling it?just at first. But, my
dear boy, I still don’t see??”

Mr. Upsher’s powers of stating his case were plainly limited. He pushed
back his rumpled hair, looked hard again at his cousin, and repeated
doggedly: “I want to be _in_ this.”

“This war?”

He nodded.

Campton groaned. What did the boy mean, and why come to him with such
tomfoolery? At that moment he felt even more unfitted than usual to deal
with practical problems, and in spite of the forgotten cousinship it was
no affair of his what Madeline Mayhew’s son wanted to be in.

But there was the boy himself, stolid, immovable, impenetrable to hints,
and with something in his wide blue eyes like George?and yet so
childishly different.

“Sit down?have a cigarette, won’t you??You know, of course,” Campton
began, “that what you propose is almost insuperably difficult?”

“Getting into George’s regiment?”

“Getting into the French army at all?for a foreigner, a neutral ... I’m
afraid there’s really nothing I can do.”

Benny Upsher smiled indulgently. “I can fix that up all right; getting
into the army, I mean. The only thing that might be hard would be
getting into his regiment.”

“Oh, as to that?out of the question, I should think.” Campton was
conscious of speaking curtly: the boy’s bland determination was
beginning to get on his nerves.

“Thank you no end,” said Benny Upsher, getting up. “Sorry to have butted
in,” he added, holding out a large brown hand.

Campton followed him to the door perplexedly. He knew that something
ought to be done?but what? On the threshold he laid his hand impulsively
on the youth’s shoulder. “Look here, my boy, we’re cousins, as you say,
and if you’re Madeline Mayhew’s boy you’re an only son. Moreover you’re
George’s friend?which matters still more to me. I can’t let you go like
this. Just let me say a word to you before??”

A gleam of shrewdness flashed through Benny Upsher’s inarticulate blue
eyes. “A word or two _against_, you mean? Why, it’s awfully kind, but
not the least earthly use. I guess I’ve heard all the arguments. But all
I see is that hulking bully trying to do Belgium in. England’s coming
in, ain’t she? Well, then why ain’t we?”

“England? Why?why, there’s no analogy??”

The young man groped for the right word. “I don’t know. Maybe not. Only
in tight places we always _do_ seem to stand together.”

“You’re mad?this is not our war. Do you really want to go out and
butcher people?”

“Yes?this kind of people,” said Benny Upsher cheerfully. “You see, I’ve
had all this talk from Uncle Harvey Mayhew a good many times on the way
over. We came out on the same boat: he wanted me to be his private
secretary at the Hague Congress. But I was pretty sure I’d have a job of
my own to attend to.”

Campton still contemplated him hopelessly. “Where is your uncle?” he
wondered.

Benny grinned. “On his way to the Hague, I suppose.”

“He ought to be here to look after you?some one ought to!”

“Then you don’t see your way to getting me into George’s regiment?”
Benny simply replied.

An hour later Campton still seemed to see him standing there, with
obstinate soft eyes repeating the same senseless question. It cost him
an effort to shake off the vision.

He returned to the Crillon to collect his possessions. On his table was
a telegram, and he seized it eagerly, wondering if by some mad chance
George’s plans were changed, if he were being sent back, if Fortin had
already arranged something....

He tore open the message, and read: “Utica July thirty-first. No news
from Benny please do all you can to facilitate his immediate return to
America dreadfully anxious your cousin Madeline Upsher.”

“Good Lord!” Campton groaned?“and I never even asked the boy’s address!”




                                BOOK II




                                   X


The war was three months old?three centuries.

By virtue of some gift of adaptation which seemed forever to discredit
human sensibility, people were already beginning to live into the
monstrous idea of it, acquire its ways, speak its language, regard it as
a thinkable, endurable, arrangeable fact; to eat it by day, and sleep on
it?yes, and soundly?at night.

The war went on; life went on; Paris went on. She had had her great hour
of resistance, when, alone, exposed and defenceless, she had held back
the enemy and broken his strength. She had had, afterward, her hour of
triumph, the hour of the Marne; then her hour of passionate and
prayerful hope, when it seemed to the watching nations that the enemy
was not only held back but thrust back, and victory finally in reach.
That hour had passed in its turn, giving way to the grey reality of the
trenches. A new speech was growing up in this new world. There were
trenches now, there was a “Front”?people were beginning to talk of their
sons at the front.

The first time John Campton heard the phrase it sent a shudder through
him. Winter was coming on, and he was haunted by the vision of the
youths out there, boys of George’s age, thousands and thousands of them,
exposed by day in reeking wet ditches and sleeping at night under the
rain and snow. People were talking calmly of victory in the spring?the
spring that was still six long months away! And meanwhile, what cold and
wet, what blood and agony, what shattered bodies out on that hideous
front, what shattered homes in all the lands it guarded!

Campton could bear to think of these things now. _His_ son was not at
the front?was safe, thank God, and likely to remain so!

During the first awful weeks of silence and uncertainty, when every
morning brought news of a fresh disaster, when no letters came from the
army and no private messages could reach it?during those weeks, while
Campton, like other fathers, was without news of his son, the war had
been to him simply a huge featureless mass crushing him earthward,
blinding him, letting him neither think nor move nor breathe.

But at last he had got permission to go to Chalons, whither Fortin, who
chanced to have begun his career as a surgeon, had been hastily
transferred. The physician, called from his incessant labours in a
roughly-improvised operating-room, to which Campton was led between rows
of stretchers laden with livid blood-splashed men, had said kindly, but
with a shade of impatience, that he had not forgotten, had done what he
could; that George’s health did not warrant his being discharged from
the army, but that he was temporarily on a staff-job at the rear, and
would probably be kept there if such and such influences were brought to
bear. Then, calling for hot water and fresh towels, the surgeon vanished
and Campton made his way back with lowered eyes between the stretchers.

The “influences” in question were brought to bear?not without Anderson
Brant’s assistance?and now that George was fairly certain to be kept at
clerical work a good many miles from the danger-zone Campton felt less
like an ant under a landslide, and was able for the first time to think
of the war as he might have thought of any other war: objectively,
intellectually, almost dispassionately, as of history in the making.

It was not that he had any doubt as to the rights and wrongs of the
case. The painfully preserved equilibrium of the neutrals made a pitiful
show now that the monstrous facts of the first weeks were known:
Germany’s diplomatic perfidy, her savagery in the field, her
premeditated and systematized terrorizing of the civil populations.
Nothing could efface what had been done in Belgium and Luxembourg, the
burning of Louvain, the bombardment of Rheims. These successive outrages
had roused in Campton the same incredulous wrath as in the rest of
mankind; but being of a speculative mind?and fairly sure now that George
would never lie in the mud and snow with the others?he had begun to
consider the landslide in its universal relations, as well as in its
effects on his private ant-heap.

His son’s situation, however, was still his central thought. That this
lad, who was meant to have been born three thousand miles away in his
own safe warless country, and who was regarded by the government of that
country as having been born there, as subject to her laws and entitled
to her protection?that this lad, by the most idiotic of blunders, a
blunder perpetrated before he was born, should have been dragged into a
conflict in which he was totally unconcerned, should become temporarily
and arbitrarily the subject of a foreign state, exposed to whatever
catastrophes that state might draw upon itself, this fact still seemed
to Campton as unjust as when it first dawned on him that his boy’s very
life might hang on some tortuous secret negotiation between the cabinets
of Europe.

He still refused to admit that France had any claim on George, any right
to his time, to his suffering or to his life. He had argued it out a
hundred times with Adele Anthony. “You say Julia and I were to blame for
not going home before the boy was born?and God knows I agree with you!
But suppose we’d meant to go? Suppose we’d made every arrangement, taken
every precaution, as my parents did in my own case, got to Havre or
Cherbourg, say, and been told the steamer had broken her screw?or been
prevented ourselves, at the last moment, by illness or accident, or any
sudden grab of the Hand of God? You’ll admit we shouldn’t have been to
blame for that; yet the law would have recognized no difference. George
would still have found himself a French soldier on the second of last
August because, by the same kind of unlucky accident, he and I were born
on the wrong side of the Atlantic. And I say that’s enough to prove it’s
an iniquitous law, a travesty of justice. Nobody’s going to convince me
that, because a steamer may happen to break a phlange of her screw at
the wrong time, or a poor woman be frightened by a thunderstorm, France
has the right to force an American boy to go and rot in the trenches.”

“In the trenches?is George in the trenches?” Adele Anthony asked,
raising her pale eyebrows.

“No.” Campton thundered, his fist crashing down among her tea things;
“and all your word-juggling isn’t going to convince me that he ought to
be there.” He paused and stared furiously about the little ladylike
drawing-room into which Miss Anthony’s sharp angles were so
incongruously squeezed. She made no answer, and he went on: “George
looks at the thing exactly as I do.”

“Has he told you so?” Miss Anthony enquired, rescuing his teacup and
putting sugar into her own.

“He has told me nothing to the contrary. You don’t seem to be aware that
military correspondence is censored, and that a soldier can’t always
blurt out everything he thinks.”

Miss Anthony followed his glance about the room, and her eyes paused
with his on her own portrait, now in the place of honour over the
mantelpiece, where it hung incongruously above a menagerie of china
animals and a collection of trophies from the Marne.

“I dropped in at the Luxembourg yesterday,” she said. “Do you know whom
I saw there? Anderson Brant. He was looking at George’s portrait, and
turned as red as a beet. You ought to do him a sketch of George some
day?after this.”

Campton’s face darkened. He knew it was partly through Brant’s influence
that George had been detached from his regiment and given a staff job in
the Argonne; but Miss Anthony’s reminder annoyed him. The Brants had
acted through sheer selfish cowardice, the desire to safeguard something
which belonged to them, something they valued as they valued their
pictures and tapestries, though of course in a greater degree; whereas
he, Campton, was sustained by a principle which he could openly avow,
and was ready to discuss with any one who had the leisure to listen.

He had explained all this so often to Miss Anthony that the words rose
again to his lips without an effort. “If it had been a national issue I
should have wanted him to be among the first: such as our having to
fight Mexico, for instance??”

“Yes; or the moon. For my part, I understand Julia and Anderson better.
They don’t care a fig for national issues; they’re just animals
defending their cub.”

“_Their_?thank you!” Campton exclaimed.

“Well, poor Anderson really _was_ a dry-nurse to the boy. Who else was
there to look after him? You were painting Spanish beauties at the
time.” She frowned. “Life’s a puzzle. I see perfectly that if you’d let
everything else go to keep George you’d never have become the great John
Campton: the _real_ John Campton you were meant to be. And it wouldn’t
have been half as satisfactory for you?or for George either. Only, in
the meanwhile, somebody had to blow the child’s nose, and pay his
dentist and doctor; and you ought to be grateful to Anderson for doing
it. Aren’t there bees or ants, or something, that are kept for such
purposes?”

Campton’s lips were opened to reply when her face changed, and he saw
that he had ceased to exist for her. He knew the reason. That look came
over everybody’s face nowadays at the hour when the evening paper came.
The old maid-servant brought it in, and lingered to hear the
_communique_. At that hour, everywhere over the globe, business and
labour and pleasure (if it still existed) were suspended for a moment
while the hearts of all men gathered themselves up in a question and a
prayer.

Miss Anthony sought for her _lorgnon_ and failed to find it. With a
shaking hand she passed the newspaper over to Campton.

“Violent enemy attacks in the region of Dixmude, Ypres, Armentieres,
Arras, in the Argonne, and on the advanced slopes of the Grand Couronne
de Nancy, have been successfully repulsed. We have taken back the
village of Soupir, near Vailly (Aisne); we have taken Maucourt and
Mogeville, to the northeast of Verdun. Progress has been made in the
region of Vermelles (Pas-de-Calais), south of Aix Noulette. Enemy
attacks in the Hauts-de-Meuse and southeast of Saint-Mihiel have also
been repulsed.

“In Poland the Austrian retreat is becoming general. The Russians are
still advancing in the direction of Kielce-Sandomir and have progressed
beyond the San in Galicia. Mlawa has been reoccupied, and the whole
railway system of Poland is now controlled by the Russian forces.”

A good day?oh, decidedly a good day. At this rate, what became of the
gloomy forecasts of the people who talked of a winter in the trenches,
to be followed by a spring campaign? True, the Serbian army was still
retreating before superior Austrian forces?but there too the scales
would soon be turned if the Russians continued to progress. That day
there was hope everywhere: the old maid-servant went away smiling, and
Miss Anthony poured out another cup of tea.

Campton had not lifted his eyes from the paper. Suddenly they lit on a
short paragraph: “Fallen on the Field of Honour.” One had got used to
that with the rest; used even to the pang of reading names one knew,
evoking familiar features, young faces blotted out in blood, young limbs
convulsed in the fires of that hell called “the Front.” But this time
Campton turned pale and the paper fell to his knee.

“Fortin-Lescluze; Jean-Jacques-Marie, lieutenant of _Chasseurs a Pied_,
gloriously fallen for France....” There followed a ringing citation.

Fortin’s son, his only son, was dead.

Campton saw before him the honest _bourgeois_ dining-room, so strangely
out of keeping with the rest of the establishment; he saw the late
August sun slanting in on the group about the table, on the ambitious
and unscrupulous great man, the two quiet women hidden under his
illustrious roof, and the youth who had held together these three
dissimilar people, making an invisible home in the heart of all that
publicity. Campton remembered his brief exchange of words with Fortin on
the threshold, and the father’s uncontrollable outburst: “For his mother
and myself it’s not a trifle?having our only son in the war.”

Campton shut his eyes and leaned back, sick with the memory. This man
had had a share in saving George; but his own son he could not save.

“What’s the matter?” Miss Anthony asked, her hand on his arm.

Campton could not bring the name to his lips. “Nothing?nothing. Only
this room’s rather hot?and I must be off anyhow.” He got up, escaping
from her solicitude, and made his way out. He must go at once to
Fortin’s for news. The physician was still at Chalons; but there would
surely be some one at the house, and Campton could at least leave a
message and ask where to write.

Dusk had fallen. His eyes usually feasted on the beauty of the new
Paris, the secret mysterious Paris of veiled lights and deserted
streets; but to-night he was blind to it. He could see nothing but
Fortin’s face, hear nothing but his voice when he said: “Our only son in
the war.”

He groped along the pitch-black street for the remembered outline of the
house (since no house-numbers were visible), and rang several times
without result. He was just turning away when a big mud-splashed motor
drove up. He noticed a soldier at the steering-wheel, then three people
got out stiffly: two women smothered in crape and a haggard man in a
dirty uniform. Campton stopped, and Fortin-Lescluze recognized him by
the light of the motor-lamp. The four stood and looked at each other.
The old mother, under her crape, appeared no bigger than a child.

“Ah?you know?” the doctor said. Campton nodded.

The father spoke in a firm voice. “It happened three days ago?at
Suippes. You’ve seen his citation? They brought him in to me at Chalons
without a warning?and too late. I took off both legs, but gangrene had
set in. Ah?if I could have got hold of one of our big surgeons.... Yes,
we’re just back from the funeral.... My mother and my wife ... they had
that comfort....”

The two women stood beside him like shrouded statues. Suddenly Mme.
Fortin’s deep voice came through the crape: “You saw him, Monsieur, that
last day ... the day you came about your own son, I think?”

“I ... yes....” Campton stammered in anguish.

The physician intervened. “And, now, _ma bonne mere_, you’re not to be
kept standing. You’re to go straight in and take your _tisane_ and go to
bed.” He kissed his mother and pushed her into his wife’s arms.
“Goodbye, my dear. Take care of her.”

The women vanished under the porte-cochere, and Fortin turned to the
painter.

“Thank you for coming. I can’t ask you in?I must go back immediately.”

“Back?”

“To my work. Thank God. If it were not for that??”

He jumped into the motor, called out “_En route_,” and was absorbed into
the night.




                                   XI


Campton went home to his studio.

He still lived there, shiftlessly and uncomfortably?for Mariette had
never come back from Lille. She had not come back, and there was no news
of her. Lille had become a part of the “occupied provinces,” from which
there was no escape; and people were beginning to find out what that
living burial meant.

Adele Anthony had urged Campton to go back to the hotel, but he
obstinately refused. What business had he to be living in expensive
hotels when, for the Lord knew how long, his means of earning a
livelihood were gone, and when it was his duty to save up for
George?George, who was safe, who was definitely out of danger, and whom
he longed more than ever, when the war was over, to withdraw from the
stifling atmosphere of his stepfather’s millions?

He had been so near to having the boy to himself when the war broke out!
He had almost had in sight the proud day when he should be able to say:
“Look here: this is your own bank-account. Now you’re independent?for
God’s sake stop and consider what you want to do with your life.”

The war had put an end to that?but only for a time. If victory came
before long, Campton’s reputation would survive the eclipse, his chances
of money-making would be as great as ever, and the new George, the
George matured and disciplined by war, would come back with a finer
sense of values, and a soul steeled against the vulgar opportunities of
wealth.

Meanwhile, it behoved his father to save every penny. And the simplest
way of saving was to go on camping in the studio, taking his meals at
the nearest wine-shop, and entrusting his bed-making and dusting to old
Mme. Lebel. In that way he could live for a long time without
appreciably reducing his savings.

Mme. Lebel’s daughter-in-law, Mme. Jules, who was in the Ardennes with
the little girl when the war broke out, was to have replaced Mariette.
But, like Mariette, Mme. Jules never arrived, and no word came from her
or the child. They too were in an occupied province. So Campton jogged
on without a servant. It was very uncomfortable, even for his lax
standards; but the dread of letting a stranger loose in the studio made
him prefer to put up with Mme. Lebel’s intermittent services.

So far she had borne up bravely. Her orphan grandsons were all at the
front (how that word had insinuated itself into the language!) but she
continued to have fairly frequent reassuring news of them. The _Chasseur
Alpin_, slightly wounded in Alsace, was safe in hospital; and the others
were well, and wrote cheerfully. Her son Jules, the cabinetmaker, was
guarding a bridge at St. Cloud, and came in regularly to see her; but
Campton noticed that it was about him that she seemed most anxious.

He was a silent industrious man, who had worked hard to support his
orphaned nephews and his mother, and had married in middle age, only
four or five years before the war, when the lads could shift for
themselves, and his own situation was secure enough to permit the luxury
of a wife and baby.

Mme. Jules had waited patiently for him, though she had other chances;
and finally they had married and the baby had been born, and blossomed
into one of those finished little Frenchwomen who, at four or five, seem
already to be musing on the great central problems of love and thrift.
The parents used to bring the child to see Campton, and he had made a
celebrated sketch of her, in her Sunday bonnet, with little earrings and
a wise smile. And these two, mother and child, had disappeared on the
second of August as completely as if the earth had opened and swallowed
them.

As Campton entered he glanced at the old woman’s den, saw that it was
empty, and said to himself: “She’s at St. Cloud again.” For he knew that
she seized every chance of being with her eldest.

He unlocked his door and felt his way into the dark studio. Mme. Lebel
might at least have made up the fire! Campton lit the lamp, found some
wood, and knelt down stiffly by the stove. Really, life was getting too
uncomfortable....

He was trying to coax a flame when the door opened and he heard Mme.
Lebel.

“Really, you know??” he turned to rebuke her; but the words died on his
lips. She stood before him, taking no notice; then her shapeless black
figure doubled up, and she sank down into his own armchair. Mme. Lebel,
who, even when he offered her a seat, never did more than rest
respectful knuckles on its back!

“What’s the matter? What’s wrong?” he exclaimed.

She lifted her aged face. “Monsieur, I came about your fire; but I am
too unhappy. I have more than I can bear.” She fumbled vainly for a
handkerchief, and wiped away her tears with the back of her old
laborious hand.

“Jules has enlisted, Monsieur; enlisted in the infantry. He has left for
the front without telling me.”

“Good Lord. Enlisted? At his age?is he crazy?”

“No, Monsieur. But the little girl?he’s had news??”

She waited to steady her voice, and then fishing in another slit of her
multiple skirts, pulled out a letter. “I got that at midday. I hurried
to St. Cloud?but he left yesterday.”

The letter was grim reading. The poor father had accidentally run across
an escaped prisoner who had regained the French lines near the village
where Mme. Jules and the child were staying. The man, who knew the
wife’s family, had been charged by them with a message to the effect
that Mme. Jules, who was a proud woman, had got into trouble with the
authorities, and been sent off to a German prison on the charge of
spying. The poor little girl had cried and clung to her mother, and had
been so savagely pushed aside by the officer who made the arrest that
she had fallen on the stone steps of the “Kommandantur” and fractured
her skull. The fugitive reported her as still alive, but unconscious,
and dying.

Jules Lebel had received this news the previous day; and within
twenty-four hours he was at the front. Guard a bridge at St. Cloud after
that? All he asked was to kill and be killed. He knew the name and the
regiment of the officer who had denounced his wife. “If I live long
enough I shall run the swine down,” he wrote. “If not, I’ll kill as many
of his kind as God lets me.”

Mme. Lebel sat silent, her head bowed on her hands; and Campton stood
and watched her. Presently she got up, passed the back of her hand
across her eyes, and said: “The room is cold. I’ll fetch some coal.”

Campton protested. “No, no, Mme. Lebel. Don’t worry about me. Make
yourself something warm to drink, and try to sleep??”

“Oh, Monsieur, thank God for the work! If it were not for that??” she
said, in the same words as the physician.

She hobbled away, and presently he heard her bumping up again with the
coal.

When his fire was started, and the curtains drawn, and she had left him,
the painter sat down and looked about the studio. Bare and untidy as it
was, he did not find the sight unpleasant: he was used to it, and being
used to things seemed to him the first requisite of comfort. But
to-night his thoughts were elsewhere: he saw neither the tattered
tapestries with their huge heroes and kings, nor the blotched walls hung
with pictures, nor the canvases stacked against the chair-legs, nor the
long littered table at which he wrote and ate and mixed his colours. At
one moment he was with Fortin-Lescluze, speeding through the night
toward fresh scenes of death; at another, in the _loge_ downstairs,
where Mme. Lebel, her day’s work done, would no doubt sit down as usual
by her smoky lamp and go on with her sewing. “Thank God for the work??”
they had both said.

And here Campton sat with idle hands, and did nothing??

It was not exactly his fault. What was there for a portrait-painter to
do? He was not a portrait-painter only, and on his brief trip to Chalons
some of the scenes by the way?gaunt unshorn faces of territorials at
railway bridges, soldiers grouped about a provision-lorry, a
mud-splashed company returning to the rear, a long grey train of
“seventy-fives” ploughing forward through the rain?at these sights the
old graphic instinct had stirred in him. But the approaches of the front
were sternly forbidden to civilians, and especially to neutrals (Campton
was beginning to wince at the word); he himself, who had been taken to
Chalons by a high official of the Army Medical Board, had been given
only time enough for his interview with Fortin, and brought back to
Paris the same night. If ever there came a time for art to interpret the
war, as Raffet, for instance, had interpreted Napoleon’s campaigns, the
day was not yet; the world in which men lived at present was one in
which the word “art” had lost its meaning.

And what was Campton, what had he ever been, but an artist?... A father;
yes, he had waked up to the practice of that other art, he was learning
to be a father. And now, at a stroke, his only two reasons for living
were gone: since the second of August he had had no portraits to paint,
no son to guide and to companion.

Other people, he knew, had found jobs: most of his friends had been
drawn into some form of war-work. Dastrey, after vain attempts to
enlist, thwarted by an untimely sciatica, had found a post near the
front, on the staff of a Red Cross Ambulance. Adele Anthony was working
eight or nine hours a day in a Depot which distributed food and clothing
to refugees from the invaded provinces; and Mrs. Brant’s name figured on
the committees of most of the newly-organized war charities. Among
Campton’s other friends many had accepted humbler tasks. Some devoted
their time to listing and packing hospital supplies, keeping accounts in
ambulance offices, sorting out refugees at the railway-stations, and
telling them where to go for food and help; still others spent their
days, and sometimes their nights, at the bitter-cold suburban sidings
where the long train-loads of wounded stopped on the way to the
hospitals of the interior. There was enough misery and confusion at the
rear for every civilian volunteer to find his task.

Among them all, Campton could not see his place. His lameness put him at
a disadvantage, since taxicabs were few, and it was difficult for him to
travel in the crowded metro. He had no head for figures, and would have
thrown the best-kept accounts into confusion; he could not climb steep
stairs to seek out refugees, nor should he have known what to say to
them when he reached their attics. And so it would have been at the
railway canteens; he choked with rage and commiseration at all the
suffering about him, but found no word to cheer the sufferers.

Secretly, too, he feared the demands that would be made on him if he
once let himself be drawn into the network of war charities. Tiresome
women would come and beg for money, or for pictures for bazaars: they
were already getting up bazaars.

Money he could not spare, since it was his duty to save it for George;
and as for pictures?why, there were a few sketches he might give, but
here again he was checked by his fear of establishing a precedent. He
had seen in the papers that the English painters were already giving
blank canvases to be sold by auction to millionaires in quest of a
portrait. But that form of philanthropy would lead to his having to
paint all the unpaintable people who had been trying to bribe a picture
out of him since his sudden celebrity. No artist had a right to cheapen
his art in that way: it could only result in his turning out work that
would injure his reputation and reduce his sales after the war.

So far, Campton had not been troubled by many appeals for help; but that
was probably because he had kept out of sight, and thrown into the fire
the letters of the few ladies who had begged a sketch for their sales,
or his name for their committees.

One appeal, however, he had not been able to avoid. About two months
earlier he had had a visit from George’s friend Boylston, the youth he
had met at Dastrey’s dinner the night before war was declared. In the
interval he had entirely forgotten Boylston; but as soon as he saw the
fat brown young man with a twinkle in his eyes and his hair, Campton
recalled him, and held out a cordial hand. Had not George said that
Boylston was the best fellow he knew?

Boylston seemed much impressed by the honour of waiting on the great
man. In spite of his cool twinkling air he was evidently full of
reverence for the things and people he esteemed, and Campton’s welcome
sent the blood up to the edge of his tight curls. It also gave him
courage to explain his visit.

He had come to beg Campton to accept the chairmanship of the American
Committee of “The Friends of French Art,” an international group of
painters who proposed to raise funds for the families of mobilised
artists. The American group would naturally be the most active, since
Americans had, in larger numbers than any other foreigners, sought
artistic training in France; and all the members agreed that Campton’s
name must figure at their head. But Campton was known to be
inaccessible, and the committee, aware that Boylston was a friend of
George’s, had asked him to transmit their request.

“You see, sir, nobody else represents....”

Campton thought as seldom as possible of what followed: he hated the
part he had played. But, after all, what else could he have done?
Everything in him recoiled from what acceptance would bring with it:
publicity, committee meetings, speechifying, writing letters, seeing
troublesome visitors, hearing harrowing stories, asking people for
money?above all, having to give his own; a great deal of his own.

He stood before the young man, abject, irresolute, chinking a bunch of
keys in his trouser-pocket, and remembering afterward that the chink
must have sounded as if it were full of money. He remembered too, oddly
enough, that as his own embarrassment increased Boylston’s vanished. It
was as though the modest youth, taking his host’s measure, had
reluctantly found him wanting, and from that moment had felt less in awe
of his genius. Illogical, of course, and unfair?but there it was.

The talk had ended by Campton’s refusing the chairmanship, but agreeing
to let his name figure on the list of honorary members, where he hoped
it would be overshadowed by rival glories. And, having reached this
conclusion, he had limped to his desk, produced a handful of notes, and
after a moment’s hesitation held out two hundred francs with the
stereotyped: “Sorry I can’t make it more....”

He had meant it to be two hundred and fifty; but, with his usual luck,
all his fumbling had failed to produce a fifty-franc note; and he could
hardly ask Boylston to “make the change.”

On the threshold the young man paused to ask for the last news of
George; and on Campton’s assuring him that it was excellent, added, with
evident sincerity: “Still hung up on that beastly staff-job? I do call
that hard luck??” And now, of all the unpleasant memories of the visit,
that phrase kept the sharpest sting.

Was it in fact hard luck? And did George himself think so? There was
nothing in his letters to show it. He seemed to have undergone no change
of view as to his own relation to the war; he had shown no desire to “be
in it,” as that mad young Upsher said.

For the first time since he had seen George’s train pull out of the Gare
de l’Est Campton found himself wondering at the perfection of his son’s
moral balance. So many things had happened since; war had turned out to
be so immeasurably more hideous and abominable than those who most
abhorred war had dreamed it could be; the issues at stake had become so
glaringly plain, right and wrong, honour and dishonour, humanity and
savagery faced each other so squarely across the trenches, that it
seemed strange to Campton that his boy, so eager, so impressionable, so
quick on the uptake, should not have felt some such burst of wrath as
had driven even poor Jules Lebel into the conflict.

The comparison, of course, was absurd. Lebel had been parted from his
dearest, his wife dragged to prison, his child virtually murdered: any
man, in his place, must have felt the blind impulse to kill. But what
was Lebel’s private plight but a symbol of the larger wrong? This war
could no longer be compared to other wars: Germany was conducting it on
methods that civilization had made men forget. The occupation of
Luxembourg; the systematic destruction of Belgium; the savage treatment
of the people of the invaded regions; the outrages of Louvain and Rheims
and Ypres; the voice with which these offences cried to heaven had waked
the indignation of humanity. Yet George, in daily contact with all this
woe and ruin, seemed as unmoved as though he had been behind a desk in
the New York office of Bullard and Brant.

If there were any change in his letters it was rather that they were
more indifferent. His reports of himself became drier, more stereotyped,
his comments on the situation fewer: he seemed to have been subdued to
the hideous business he worked in. It was true that his letters had
never been expressive: his individuality seemed to dry up in contact
with pen and paper. It was true also that letters from the front were
severely censored, and that it would have been foolish to put in them
anything likely to prevent their delivery. But George had managed to
send several notes by hand, and these were as colourless as the others;
and so were his letters to his mother, which Mrs. Brant always sent to
Miss Anthony, who privately passed them on to Campton.

Besides, there were other means of comparison. People with sons at the
front were beginning to hand about copies of their letters; a few
passages, strangely moving and beautiful, had found their way into the
papers. George, God be praised, was not at the front; but he was in the
war-zone, far nearer the sights and sounds of death than his father, and
he had comrades and friends in the trenches. Strange that what he wrote
was still so cold to the touch....

“It’s the scientific mind, I suppose,” Campton reflected. “These
youngsters are all rather like beautifully made machines....” Yet it had
never before struck him that his son was like a beautifully made
machine.

He remembered that he had not dined, and got up wearily. As he passed
out he noticed on a pile of letters and papers a brand-new card: he
could always tell the new cards by their whiteness, which twenty-four
hours of studio-dust turned to grey.

Campton held the card to the light. It was large and glossy, a beautiful
thick pre-war card; and on it was engraved:

                             HARVEY MAYHEW
             _Delegue des Etats Unis au Congres de la Paix_

with a pen-stroke through the lower line. Beneath was written an
imperative “p.t.o.”; and reversing the card, Campton read, in an
agitated hand: “Must see you at once. Call up Nouveau Luxe”; and, lower
down: “Excuse ridiculous card. Impossible get others under six weeks.”

So Mayhew had turned up! Well, it was a good thing: perhaps he might
bring news of that mad Benny Upsher whose doings had caused Campton so
much trouble in the early days that he could never recall the boy’s
obstinate rosy face without a stir of irritation.

“I want to be _in_ this thing??” Well, young Upsher had apparently been
in it with a vengeance; but what he had cost Campton in cables to his
distracted family, and in weary pilgrimages to the War Office, the
American Embassy, the Consulate, the Prefecture of Police, and divers
other supposed sources of information, the painter meant some day to
tell his young relative in no measured terms. That is, if the chance
ever presented itself; for, since he had left the studio that morning
four months ago, Benny had so completely vanished that Campton sometimes
wondered, with a little shiver, if they were ever likely to exchange
words again in this world.

“Mayhew will know; he wants to tell me about the boy, I suppose,” he
mused.

Harvey Mayhew?Harvey Mayhew with a pen-stroke through the title which,
so short a time since, it had been his chief ambition to display on his
cards! No wonder it embarrassed him now. But where on earth had he been
all this time? As Campton pondered on the card a memory flashed out.
Mayhew? Mayhew? Why, wasn’t it Mayhew who had waylaid him in the Crillon
a few hours before war was declared, to ask his advice about the safest
way of travelling to the Hague? And hadn’t he, Campton, in all good
faith, counselled him to go by Luxembourg “in order to be out of the way
of trouble”?

The remembrance swept away the painter’s sombre thoughts, and he burst
into a laugh that woke the echoes of the studio.




                                  XII


Not having it in his power to call up his cousin on the telephone,
Campton went the next morning to the Nouveau Luxe.

It was the first time that he had entered the famous hotel since the
beginning of the war; and at sight of the long hall his heart sank as it
used to whenever some untoward necessity forced him to run its deadly
blockade.

But the hall was empty when he entered, empty not only of the brilliant
beings who filled his soul with such dismay, but also of the porters,
footmen and lift-boys who, even in its unfrequented hours, lent it the
lustre of their liveries.

A tired concierge sat at the desk, and near the door a boy scout,
coiling his bare legs about a high stool, raised his head languidly from
his book. But for these two, the world of the Nouveau Luxe had
disappeared.

As the lift was not running there was nothing to disturb their
meditations; and when Campton had learned that Mr. Mayhew would receive
him he started alone up the deserted stairs.

Only a few dusty trunks remained in the corridors where luggage used to
be piled as high as in the passages of the great liners on sailing-day;
and instead of the murmur of ladies’-maids’ skirts, and explosions of
laughter behind glazed service-doors, the swish of a charwoman’s mop
alone broke the silence.

“After all,” Campton thought, “if war didn’t kill people how much
pleasanter it might make the world!”

This was evidently not the opinion of Mr. Harvey Mayhew, whom he found
agitatedly pacing a large room hung in shrimp-pink brocade, which opened
on a vista of turquoise tiling and porcelain tub.

Mr. Mayhew’s round countenance, composed of the same simple curves as
his nephew’s, had undergone a remarkable change. He was still round, but
he was ravaged. His fringe of hair had grown greyer, and there were
crow’s-feet about his blue eyes, and wrathful corrugations in his
benignant forehead.

He seized Campton’s hands and glared at him through indignant
eye-glasses.

“My dear fellow, I looked you up as soon as I arrived. I need you?we all
need you?we need your powerful influence and your world-wide celebrity.
Campton, the day for words has gone by. We must _act_!”

Campton let himself down into an armchair. No verb in the language
terrified him as much as that which his cousin had flung at him. He
gazed at the ex-Delegate with dismay. “I didn’t know you were here.
Where have you come from?” he asked.

Mr. Mayhew, resting a manicured hand on the edge of a gilt table, looked
down awfully on him.

“I come,” he said, “from a German prison.”

“Good Lord?_you_?” Campton gasped.

He continued to gaze at his cousin with terror, but of a new kind. Here
at last was someone who had actually been in the jaws of the monster,
who had seen, heard, suffered?a witness who could speak of that which he
knew! No wonder Mr. Mayhew took himself seriously?at last he had
something to be serious about! Campton stared at him as if he had risen
from the dead.

Mr. Mayhew cleared his throat and went on: “You may remember our meeting
at the Crillon?on the 31st of last July it was?and my asking you the
best way of getting to the Hague, in view of impending events. At that
time” (his voice took a note of irony) “I was a Delegate to the Peace
Congress at the Hague, and conceived it to be my duty to carry out my
mandate at whatever personal risk. You advised me?as you may also
remember?in order to be out of the way of trouble, to travel by
Luxembourg,” (Campton stirred uneasily). “I followed your advice; and,
not being able to go by train, I managed, with considerable difficulty,
to get permission to travel by motor. I reached Luxembourg as the German
army entered it?the next day I was in a German prison.”

The next day! Then this pink-and-white man who stood there with his
rimless eye-glasses and neatly trimmed hair, and his shining nails
reflected in the plate glass of the table-top, this perfectly typical,
usual sort of harmless rich American, had been for four months in the
depths of the abyss that men were beginning to sound with fearful
hearts!

“It is a simple miracle,” said Mr. Mayhew, “that I was not shot as a
spy.”

Campton’s voice choked in his throat. “Where were you imprisoned?”

“The first night, in the Police commissariat, with common thieves and
vagabonds?with?” Mr. Mayhew lowered his voice and his eyes: “With
prostitutes, Campton....”

He waited for this to take effect, and continued: “The next day, in
consequence of the energetic intervention of our consul?who behaved
extremely well, as I have taken care to let them know in Washington?I
was sent back to my hotel on parole, and kept there, kept there,
Campton?_I_, the official representative of a friendly country?under
strict police surveillance, like ... like an unfortunate woman ... for
eight days: a week and one day over!”

Mr. Mayhew sank into a chair and passed a scented handkerchief across
his forehead. “When I was finally released I was without money, without
luggage, without my motor or my wretched chauffeur?a Frenchman, who had
been instantly carried off to Germany. In this state of destitution, and
without an apology, I was shipped to Rotterdam and put on a steamer
sailing for America.” He wiped his forehead again, and the corners of
his agitated lips. “Peace, Campton?_Peace_? When I think that I believed
in a thing called Peace! That I left Utica?always a difficult
undertaking for me?because I deemed it my duty, in the interests of
_Peace_,” (the word became a hiss) “to travel to the other side of the
world, and use the weight of my influence and my experience in such a
cause!”

He clenched his fist and shook it in the face of an invisible foe.

“My influence, if I have any; my experience?ha, I _have_ had experience
now, Campton! And, my God, sir, they shall both be used till my last
breath to show up these people, to proclaim to the world what they
really are, to rouse public opinion in America against a nation of
savages who ought to be hunted off the face of the globe like
vermin?like the vermin in their own prison cells! Campton?if I may say
so without profanity?I come to bring not Peace but a Sword!”

It was some time before the flood of Mr. Mayhew’s wrath subsided, or
before there floated up from its agitated depths some fragments of his
subsequent history and present intentions. Eventually, however, Campton
gathered that after a short sojourn in America, where he found opinion
too lukewarm for him, he had come back to Europe to collect the
experiences of other victims of German savagery. Mr. Mayhew, in short,
meant to devote himself to Atrocities; and he had sought out Campton to
ask his help, and especially to be put in contact with persons engaged
in refugee-work, and likely to have come across flagrant offences
against the law of nations.

It was easy to comply with the latter request. Campton scribbled a
message to Adele Anthony at her refugee Depot; and he undertook also to
find out from what officials Mr. Mayhew might obtain leave to visit the
front.

“I know it’s difficult??” he began; but Mr. Mayhew laughed. “I am here
to surmount difficulties?after what I’ve been through!”

It was not until then that Mr. Mayhew found time to answer an enquiry
about his nephew.

“Benny Upsher ? Ha?I’m proud of Benny! He’s a hero, that nephew of
mine?he was always my favourite.”

He went on to say that the youth, having failed to enlist in the French
army, had managed to get back to England, and there, passing himself off
as a Canadian (“Born at Murray Bay, sir?wasn’t it lucky?”) had joined an
English regiment, and, after three months’ training, was now on his way
to the front. His parents had made a great outcry?moved heaven and earth
for news of him?but the boy had covered up his tracks so cleverly that
they had had no word till he was starting for Boulogne with his draft.
Rather high-handed?and poor Madeline had nearly gone out of her mind;
but Mr. Mayhew confessed he had no patience with such feminine weakness.
“Benny’s a man, and must act as a man. That boy, Campton, saw things as
they were from the first.”

Campton took leave, dazed and crushed by the conversation. It was all
one to him if Harvey Mayhew chose to call on America to avenge his
wrongs; Campton himself was beginning to wish that his country would
wake up to what was going on in the world; but that he, Campton, should
be drawn into the affair, should have to write letters, accompany the
ex-Delegate to Embassies and Red Crosses, languish with him in
ministerial antechambers, and be deafened with appeals to his own
celebrity and efficiency; that he should have ascribed to himself that
mysterious gift of “knowing the ropes” in which his whole blundering
career had proved him to be cruelly lacking: this was so dreadful to him
as to obscure every other question.

“Thank the Lord,” he muttered, “I haven’t got the telephone anyhow!”

He glanced cautiously down the wide stairs of the hotel to assure
himself of a safe retreat; but in the hall an appealing voice detained
him.

“Dear Master! Dear great Master! I’ve been lying in wait for you!”

A Red Cross nurse advanced: not the majestic figure of the Crimean
legend, but the new version evolved in the rue de la Paix: short skirts,
long ankles, pearls and curls. The face under the coif was young,
wistful, haggard with the perpetual hurry of the aimless. Where had he
seen those tragic eyes, so full of questions and so invariably
uninterested in the answers?

“I’m Madge Talkett?I saw you at?I saw you the day war was declared,” the
young lady corrected herself. Campton remembered their meeting at Mrs.
Brant’s, and was grateful for her evident embarrassment. So few of the
new generation seemed aware that there were any privacies left to
respect! He looked at Mrs. Talkett more kindly.

“You _must_ come,” she continued, laying her hand on his arm (her
imperatives were always in italics). “Just a step from here?to my
hospital. There’s someone asking for you.”

“For me? Someone wounded?” What if it were Benny Upsher? A cold fear
broke over Campton.

“Someone dying,” Mrs. Talkett said. “Oh, nobody you know?a poor young
French soldier. He was brought here two days ago ... and he keeps on
repeating your name....”

“My name? Why my name?”

“We don’t know. We don’t think he knows you ... but he’s shot to pieces
and half delirious. He’s a painter, and he’s seen pictures of yours, and
keeps talking about them, and saying he wants you to look at his.... You
_will_ come? It’s just next door, you know.”

He did not know?having carefully avoided all knowledge of hospitals in
his dread of being drawn into war-work, and his horror of coming as a
mere spectator to gaze on agony he could neither comfort nor relieve.
Hospitals were for surgeons and women; if he had been rich he would have
given big sums to aid them; being unable to do even that, he preferred
to keep aloof.

He followed Mrs. Talkett out of the hotel and around the corner. The
door of another hotel, with a big Red Cross above it, admitted them to a
marble vestibule full of the cold smell of disinfectants. An orderly sat
reading a newspaper behind the desk, and nurses whisked backward and
forward with trays and pails. A lady with a bunch of flowers came down
the stairs drying her eyes.

Campton’s whole being recoiled from what awaited him. Since the poor
youth was delirious, what was the use of seeing him? But women took a
morbid pleasure in making one do things that were useless!

On an upper floor they paused at a door where there was a moment’s
parleying.

“Come,” Mrs. Talkett said; “he’s a little better.”

The room contained two beds. In one lay a haggard elderly man with
closed eyes and lips drawn back from his clenched teeth. His legs
stirred restlessly, and one of his arms was in a lifted sling attached
to a horrible kind of gallows above the bed. It reminded Campton of Juan
de Borgona’s pictures of the Inquisition, in the Prado.

“Oh, _he’s_ all right; he’ll get well. It’s the other....”

The other lay quietly in his bed. No gallows overhung him, no visible
bandaging showed his wound. There was a flush on his young cheeks and
his eyes looked out, large and steady, from their hollow brows. But he
was the one who would not get well.

Mrs. Talkett bent over him: her voice was sweet when it was lowered.

“I’ve kept my promise. Here he is.”

The eyes turned in the lad’s immovable head, and he and Campton looked
at each other. The painter had never seen the face before him: a sharp
irregular face, prematurely hollowed by pain, with thick chestnut hair
tumbled above the forehead.

“It’s you, Master!” the boy said.

Campton sat down beside him. “How did you know? Have you seen me
before?”

“Once?at one of your exhibitions.” He paused and drew a hard breath.
“But the first thing was the portrait at the Luxembourg ... your
son....”

“Ah, you look like him!” Campton broke out.

The eyes of the young soldier lit up. “Do I?... Someone told me he was
your son. I went home from seeing that and began to paint. After the
war, would you let me come and work with you? My things ... wait ...
I’ll show you my things first.” He tried to raise himself. Mrs. Talkett
slipped her arm under his shoulders, and resting against her he lifted
his hand and pointed to the bare wall facing him.

“There?there; you see? Look for yourself. The brushwork ... not too bad,
eh? I was ... getting it.... There, that head of my grandfather, eh? And
my lame sister.... Oh, I’m young ...” he smiled ... “never had any
models.... But after the war you’ll see....”

Mrs. Talkett let him down again, and feverishly, vehemently, he began to
describe, one by one, and over and over again, the pictures he saw on
the naked wall in front of him.

A nurse had slipped in, and Mrs. Talkett signed to Campton to follow her
out. The boy seemed aware that the painter was going, and interrupted
his enumeration to say: “As soon as the war’s over you’ll let me come?”

“Of course I will,” Campton promised.

In the passage he asked: “Can nothing save him? Has everything possible
been done?”

“Everything. We’re all so fond of him?the biggest surgeons have seen
him. It seems he has great talent?but he never could afford models, so
he has painted his family over and over again.” Mrs. Talkett looked at
Campton with a good deal of feeling in her changing eyes. “You see, it
_did_ help, your coming. I know you thought it tiresome of me to
insist.” She led him downstairs and into the office, where a lame
officer with the Croix de Guerre sat at the desk. The officer wrote out
the young soldier’s name?Rene Davril?and his family’s address.

“They’re quite destitute, Monsieur. An old infirm grandfather, a lame
sister who taught music, a widowed mother and several younger
children....”

“I’ll come back, I’ll come back,” Campton again promised as he parted
from Mrs. Talkett.

He had not thought it possible that he would ever feel so kindly toward
her as at that moment. And then, a second later, she nearly spoiled it
by saying: “Dear Master?you see the penalty of greatness!”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The name of Rene Davril was with Campton all day. The boy had believed
in him?his eyes had been opened by the sight of George’s portrait! And
now, in a day or two more, he would be filling a three-by-six ditch in a
crowded graveyard. At twenty?and with eyes like George’s.

What could Campton do? No one was less visited by happy inspirations;
the “little acts of kindness” recommended to his pious infancy had
always seemed to him far harder to think of than to perform. But now
some instinct carried him straight to the corner of his studio where he
remembered having shoved out of sight a half-finished study for George’s
portrait. He found it, examined it critically, scribbled his signature
in one corner, and set out with it for the hospital. On the way he had
to stop at the Ministry of War on Mayhew’s tiresome business, and was
delayed there till too late to proceed with his errand before luncheon.
But in the afternoon he passed in again through the revolving plate
glass, and sent up his name. Mrs. Talkett was not there, but a nurse
came down, to whom, with embarrassment, he explained himself.

“Poor little Davril? Yes?he’s still alive. Will you come up? His family
are with him.”

Campton shook his head and held out the parcel. “It’s a picture he
wanted??”

The nurse promised it should be given. She looked at Campton with a
vague benevolence, having evidently never heard his name; and the
painter turned away with a cowardly sense that he ought to have taken
the picture up himself. But to see the death-change on a face so like
his son’s, and its look reflected in other anguished faces, was more
than he could endure. He turned away.

The next morning Mrs. Talkett wrote that Rene Davril was better, that
the fever had dropped, and that he was lying quietly looking at the
sketch. “The only thing that troubles him is that he realizes now that
you have not seen his pictures. But he is very happy, and blesses you
for your goodness.”

His goodness! Campton, staring at the letter, could only curse himself
for his stupidity. He saw now that the one thing which might have
comforted the poor lad would have been to have his own pictures seen and
judged; and that one thing, he, Campton, so many years vainly athirst
for the approbation of the men he revered?that one thing he had never
thought of doing! The only way of atoning for his negligence was
instantly to go out to the suburb where the Davril family lived.
Campton, without a scruple, abandoned Mr. Mayhew, with whom he had an
appointment at the Embassy and another at the War Office, and devoted
the rest of the day to the expedition. It was after six when he reached
the hospital again; and when Mrs. Talkett came down he went up to her
impetuously.

“Well?I’ve seen them; I’ve seen his pictures, and he’s right. They’re
astonishing! Awkward, still, and hesitating; but with such a sense of
air and mass. He’ll do things?May I go up and tell him?”

He broke off and looked at her.

“He died an hour ago. If only you’d seen them yesterday!” she said.




                                  XIII


The killing of Rene Davril seemed to Campton one of the most senseless
crimes the war had yet perpetrated. It brought home to him, far more
vividly than the distant death of poor Jean Fortin, what an incalculable
sum of gifts and virtues went to make up the monster’s daily meal.

“Ah, you want genius, do you? Mere youth’s not enough ... and health and
gaiety and courage; you want brains in the bud, imagination and poetry,
ideas all folded up in their sheath! It takes that, does it, to tempt
your jaded appetite?” He was reminded of the rich vulgarians who will
eat only things out of season. “That’s what war is like,” he muttered
savagely to himself.

The next morning he went to the funeral with Mrs. Talkett?between whom
and himself the tragic episode had created a sort of improvised
intimacy?walking at her side through the November rain, behind the poor
hearse with the tricolour over it.

At the church, while the few mourners shivered in a damp side chapel, he
had time to study the family: a poor sobbing mother, two anæmic little
girls, and the lame sister who was musical?a piteous group, smelling of
poverty and tears. Behind them, to his surprise, he saw the curly brown
head and short-sighted eyes of Boylston. Campton wondered at the
latter’s presence; then he remembered “The Friends of French Art,” and
concluded that the association had probably been interested in poor
Davril.

With some difficulty he escaped from the thanks of the mother and
sisters, and picked up a taxi to take Mrs. Talkett home.

“No?back to the hospital,” she said. “A lot of bad cases have come in,
and I’m on duty again all day.” She spoke as if it were the most natural
thing in the world; and he shuddered at the serenity with which women
endure the unendurable.

At the hospital he followed her in. The Davril family, she told him, had
insisted that they had no claim on his picture, and that it must be
returned to him. Mrs. Talkett went up to fetch it; and Campton waited in
one of the drawing-rooms. A step sounded behind him, and another nurse
came in?but was it a nurse, or some haloed nun from a Umbrian triptych,
her pure oval framed in white, her long fingers clasping a book and
lily?

“Mme. de Dolmetsch!” he cried; and thought: “A new face again?what an
artist!”

She seized his hands.

“I heard from dear Madge Talkett that you were here, and I’ve asked her
to leave us together.” She looked at him with ravaged eyes, as if just
risen from a penitential vigil.

“Come, please, into my little office: you didn’t know that I was the
_Infirmiere-Major_? My dear friend, what upheavals, what cataclysms! I
see no one now: all my days and nights are given to my soldiers.”

She glided ahead on noiseless sandals to a little room where a bowl of
jade filled with gardenias, and a tortoise-shell box of gold-tipped
cigarettes, stood on a desk among torn and discoloured _livrets
militaires_. The room was empty, and Mme. de Dolmetsch, closing the
door, drew Campton to a seat at her side. So close to her, he saw that
the perfect lines of her face were flawed by marks of suffering. “The
woman really has a heart,” he thought, “or the war couldn’t have made
her so much handsomer.”

Mme. de Dolmetsch leaned closer: a breath of incense floated from her
conventual draperies.

“I know why you came,” she continued; “you were good to that poor little
Davril.” She clutched Campton suddenly with a blue-veined hand. “My dear
friend, can anything justify such horrors? Isn’t it abominable that boys
like that should be murdered? That some senile old beast of a
diplomatist should decree, after a good dinner, that all we love best
must be offered up?” She caught his hands again, her liturgical scent
enveloping him. “Campton, I know you feel as I do.” She paused, pressing
his fingers hard, her beautiful mouth trembling. “For God’s sake tell
me,” she implored, “how you’ve managed to keep your son from the front!”

Campton drew away, red and inarticulate. “I?my son? Those things depend
on the authorities. My boy’s health....” he stammered.

“Yes, yes; I know. Your George is delicate. But so is my
Ladislas?dreadfully. The lungs too. I’ve trembled for him for so long;
and now, at any moment....” Two tears gathered on her long lashes and
rolled down ... “at any moment he may be taken from the War Office,
where he’s doing invaluable work, and forced into all that blood and
horror; he may be brought back to me like those poor creatures upstairs,
who are hardly men any longer ... mere vivisected animals, without eyes,
without faces.” She lowered her voice and drew her lids together, so
that her very eyes seemed to be whispering. “Ladislas has enemies who
are jealous of him (I could give you their names); at this moment
someone who ought to be at the front is intriguing to turn him out and
get his place. Oh, Campton, you’ve known this terror?you know what one’s
nights are like! Have pity?tell me how you managed!”

He had no idea of what he answered, or how he finally got away.
Everything that was dearest to him, the thought of George, the vision of
the lad dying upstairs, was defiled by this monstrous coupling of their
names with that of the supple middle-aged adventurer safe in his
spotless uniform at the War Office. And beneath the boiling-up of
Campton’s disgust a new fear lifted its head. How did Mme. de Dolmetsch
know about George? And what did she know? Evidently there had been
foolish talk somewhere. Perhaps it was Mrs. Brant?or perhaps Fortin
himself. All these great doctors forgot the professional secret with
some one woman, if not with many. Had not Fortin revealed to his own
wife the reason of Campton’s precipitate visit? The painter escaped from
Mme. de Dolmetsch’s scented lair, and from the sights and sounds of the
hospital, in a state of such perturbation that for a while he stood in
the street wondering where he had meant to go next.

He had his own reasons for agreeing to the Davrils’ suggestion that the
picture should be returned to him; and presently these reasons came
back. “They’d never dare to sell it themselves; but why shouldn’t I sell
it for them?” he had thought, remembering their denuded rooms, and the
rusty smell of the women’s mourning. It cost him a pang to part with a
study of his boy; but he was in a superstitious and expiatory mood, and
eager to act on it.

He remembered having been told by Boylston that “The Friends of French
Art” had their office in the Palais Royal, and he made his way through
the deserted arcades to the door of a once-famous restaurant.

Behind the plate-glass windows young women with rolled-up sleeves and
straw in their hair were delving in packing-cases, while, divided from
them by an improvised partition, another group were busy piling on the
cloak-room shelves garments such as had never before dishonoured them.

Campton stood fascinated by the sight of the things these young women
were sorting: pink silk combinations, sporting ulsters in glaring black
and white checks, straw hats wreathed with last summer’s sunburnt
flowers, high-heeled satin shoes split on the instep, and fringed and
bugled garments that suggested obsolete names like “dolman” and
“mantle,” and looked like the costumes dug out of a country-house attic
by amateurs preparing to play “Caste.” Was it possible that “The Friends
of French Art” proposed to clothe the families of fallen artists in
these prehistoric properties?

Boylston appeared, flushed and delighted (and with straw in his hair
also), and led his visitor up a corkscrew stair. They passed a room
where a row of people in shabby mourning like that of the Davril family
sat on restaurant chairs before a _caissiere’s_ desk; and at the desk
Campton saw Miss Anthony, her veil pushed back and a card-catalogue at
her elbow, listening to a young woman who was dramatically stating her
case.

Boylston saw Campton’s surprise, and said: “Yes, we’re desperately
short-handed, and Miss Anthony has deserted her refugees for a day or
two to help me to straighten things out.”

His own office was in a faded _cabinet particulier_ where the
dinner-table had been turned into a desk, and the weak-springed divan
was weighed down under suits of ready-made clothes bearing the label of
a wholesale clothier.

“These are the things we really give them; but they cost a lot of money
to buy,” Boylston explained. On the divan sat a handsomely dressed
elderly lady with a long emaciated face and red eyes, who rose as they
entered. Boylston spoke to her in an undertone and led her into another
_cabinet_, where Campton saw her tragic figure sink down on the sofa,
under a glass scrawled with amorous couplets.

“That was Mme. Beausite.... You didn’t recognize her? Poor thing! Her
youngest boy is blind: his eyes were put out by a shell. She is very
unhappy, and she comes here and helps now and then. Beausite? Oh no, we
never see _him_. He’s only our Honorary President.”

Boylston obviously spoke without afterthought; but Campton felt the
sting. He too was on the honorary committee.

“Poor woman! What? The young fellow who did Cubist things? I hadn’t
heard....” He remembered the cruel rumour that Beausite, when his glory
began to wane, had encouraged his three sons in three different lines of
art, so that there might always be a Beausite in the fashion.... “You
must have to listen to pretty ghastly stories here,” he said.

The young man nodded, and Campton, with less embarrassment than he had
expected, set forth his errand. In that atmosphere it seemed natural to
be planning ways of relieving misery, and Boylston at once put him at
his ease by looking pleased but not surprised.

“You mean to sell the sketch, sir? That will put the Davrils out of
anxiety for a long time; and they’re in a bad way, as you saw.” Boylston
undid the parcel, with a respectful: “May I?” and put the canvas on a
chair. He gazed at it for a few moments, the blood rising sensitively
over his face till it reached his tight ridge of hair. Campton
remembered what George had said of his friend’s silent admirations; he
was glad the young man did not speak.

When he did, it was to say with a businesslike accent: “We’re trying to
get up an auction of pictures and sketches?and if we could lead off with
this....”

It was Campton’s turn to redden. The possibility was one he had not
thought of. If the picture were sold at auction, Anderson Brant would be
sure to buy it! But he could not say this to Boylston. He hesitated, and
the other, who seemed quick at feeling his way, added at once: “But
perhaps you’d rather sell it privately? In that case we should get the
money sooner.”

It was just the right thing to say: and Campton thanked him and picked
up his sketch. At the door he hesitated, feeling that it became a member
of the honorary committee to add something more.

“How are you getting on? Getting all the help you need?”

Boylston smiled. “We need such a lot. People have been very generous:
we’ve had several big sums. But look at those ridiculous clothes
downstairs?we get boxes and boxes of such rubbish! And there are so many
applicants, and such hard cases. Take those poor Davrils, for instance.
The lame Davril girl has a talent for music: plays the violin. Well,
what good does it do her now? The artists are having an awful time. If
this war goes on much longer, it won’t be only at the front that they’ll
die.”

“Ah??” said Campton. “Well, I’ll take this to a dealer??”

On the way down he turned in to greet Miss Anthony. She looked up in
surprise, her tired face haloed in tumbling hairpins; but she was too
busy to do more than nod across the group about her desk.

At his offer to take her home she shook her head. “I’m here till after
seven. Mr. Boylston and I are nearly snowed under. We’ve got to go down
presently and help unpack; and after that I’m due at my refugee canteen
at the Nord. It’s my night shift.”

Campton, on the way back to Montmartre, fell to wondering if such
excesses of altruism were necessary, or a mere vain overflow of energy.
He was terrified by his first close glimpse of the ravages of war, and
the efforts of the little band struggling to heal them seemed pitifully
ineffectual. No doubt they did good here and there, made a few lives
less intolerable; but how the insatiable monster must laugh at them as
he spread his red havoc wider!

On reaching home, Campton forgot everything at sight of a letter from
George. He had not had one for two weeks, and this interruption, just as
the military mails were growing more regular, had made him anxious. But
it was the usual letter: brief, cheerful, inexpressive. Apparently there
was no change in George’s situation, nor any wish on his part that there
should be. He grumbled humorously at the dulness of his work and the
monotony of life in a war-zone town; and wondered whether, if this sort
of thing went on, there might not soon be some talk of leave. And just
at the end of his affectionate and unsatisfactory two pages, Campton lit
on a name that roused him.

“I saw a fellow who’d seen Benny Upsher yesterday on his way to the
English front. The young lunatic looked very fit. You know he
volunteered in the English army when he found he couldn’t get into the
French. He’s likely to get all the fighting he wants.” It was a relief
to know that someone had seen Benny Upsher lately. The letter was but
four days old, and he was then on his way to the front. Probably he was
not yet in the fighting he wanted, and one could, without remorse, call
up an unmutilated face and clear blue eyes.

Campton, re-reading the postscript, was struck by a small thing. George
had originally written: “I saw Benny Upsher yesterday,” and had then
altered the phrase to: “I saw a fellow who’d seen Benny Upsher.” There
was nothing out of the way in that: it simply showed that he had written
in haste and revised the sentence. But he added: “The young lunatic
looked very fit.” Well: that too was natural. It was “the fellow” who
reported Benny as looking fit; the phrase was rather elliptic, but
Campton could hardly have said why it gave him the impression that it
was George himself who had seen Upsher. The idea was manifestly absurd,
since there was the length of the front between George’s staff-town and
the fiery pit yawning for his cousin. Campton laid aside the letter with
the distinct wish that his son had not called Benny Upsher a young
lunatic.




                                  XIV


When Campton took his sketch of George to Leonce Black, the dealer who
specialized in “Camptons,” he was surprised at the magnitude of the sum
which the great picture-broker, lounging in a glossy War Office uniform
among his Gauguins and Vuillards, immediately offered.

Leonce Black noted his surprise and smiled. “You think there’s nothing
doing nowadays? Don’t you believe it, Mr. Campton. Now that the big men
have stopped painting, the collectors are all the keener to snap up
what’s left in their portfolios.” He placed the cheque in Campton’s
hand, and drew back to study the effect of the sketch, which he had
slipped into a frame against a velvet curtain. “Ah??” he said, as if he
were tasting an old wine.

As Campton turned to go the dealer’s enthusiasm bubbled over. “Haven’t
you got anything more? Remember me if you have.”

“I don’t sell my sketches,” said Campton. “This was exceptional?for a
charity....”

“I know, I know. Well, you’re likely to have a good many more calls of
the same sort before we get this war over,” the dealer remarked
philosophically. “Anyhow, remember I can place anything you’ll give me.
When people want a Campton it’s to me they come. I’ve got standing
orders from two clients ... both given before the war, and both good
to-day.”

Campton paused in the doorway, seized by his old fear of the painting’s
passing into Anderson Brant’s possession.

“Look here: where is this one going?”

The dealer cocked his handsome grey head and glanced archly through
plump eyelids. “Violation of professional secrecy? Well.... Well ...
under constraint I’ll confess it’s to a young lady: great admirer,
artist herself. Had her order by cable from New York a year ago. Been on
the lookout ever since.”

“Oh, all right,” Campton answered, repocketing the money.

He set out at once for “The Friends of French Art,” and Leonce Black,
bound for the Ministry of War, walked by his side, regaling him
alternately with the gossip of the Ministry and with racy anecdotes of
the dealers’ world. In M. Black’s opinion the war was an inexcusable
blunder, since Germany was getting to be the best market for the kind of
freak painters out of whom the dealers who “know how to make a man
‘foam’” can make a big turn over. “I don’t know what on earth will
become of all those poor devils now: Paris cared for them only because
she knew Germany would give any money for their things. Personally, as
you know, I’ve always preferred sounder goods: I’m a classic, my dear
Campton, and I can feel only classic art,” said the dealer, swelling out
his uniformed breast and stroking his Assyrian nose as though its
handsome curve followed the pure Delphic line. “But, as long as things
go on as they are at present in _my_ department of the administration,
the war’s not going to end in a hurry,” he continued. “And now we’re in
for it, we’ve got to see the thing through.”

Campton found Boylston, as usual, in his melancholy _cabinet
particulier_. He was listening to the tale of a young woman with
streaming eyes and an extravagant hat. She was so absorbed in her
trouble that she did not notice Campton’s entrance, and behind her back
the painter made a sign to say that she was not to be interrupted.

He was as much interested in the suppliant’s tale as in watching
Boylston’s way of listening. That modest and commonplace-looking young
man was beginning to excite a lively curiosity in Campton. It was not
only that he remembered George’s commendation, for he knew that the
generous enthusiasms of youth may be inspired by trifles imperceptible
to the older. It was Boylston himself who interested the painter. He
knew no more of the young man than the scant details Miss Anthony could
give. Boylston, it appeared, was the oldest hope of a well-to-do
Connecticut family. On his leaving college a place had been reserved for
him in the paternal business; but he had announced good-humouredly that
he did not mean to spend his life in an office, and one day, after a ten
minutes’ conversation with his father, as to which details were lacking,
he had packed a suitcase and sailed for France. There he had lived ever
since, in shabby rooms in the rue de Verneuil, on the scant allowance
remitted by an irate parent: apparently never running into debt, yet
always ready to help a friend.

All the American art-students in Paris knew Boylston; and though he was
still in the early thirties, they all looked up to him. For Boylston had
one quality which always impresses youth: Boylston knew everybody.
Whether you went with him to a smart restaurant in the rue Royale, or to
a wine-shop of the Left Bank, the _patron_ welcomed him with the same
cordiality, and sent the same emphatic instructions to the cook. The
first fresh peas and the tenderest spring chicken were always for this
quiet youth, who, when he was alone, dined cheerfully on veal and _vin
ordinaire_. If you wanted to know where to get the best Burgundy,
Boylston could tell you; he could also tell you where to buy an
engagement ring for your girl, a Ford runabout going at half-price, or
the _papier timbre_ on which to address a summons to a recalcitrant
laundress.

If you got into a row with your landlady you found that Boylston knew
her, and that at sight of him she melted and withdrew her claim; or,
failing this, he knew the solicitor in whose office her son was a clerk,
or had other means of reducing her to reason. Boylston also knew a man
who could make old clocks go, another who could clean flannels without
their shrinking, and a third who could get you old picture-frames for a
song; and, best of all, when any inexperienced American youth was caught
in the dark Parisian cobweb (and the people at home were on no account
to hear about it) Boylston was found to be the friend and familiar of
certain occult authorities who, with a smile and a word of warning,
could break the mesh and free the victim.

The mystery was, how and why all these people did what Boylston wanted;
but the reason began to dawn on Campton as he watched the young woman in
the foolish hat deliver herself of her grievance. Boylston was simply a
perfect listener?and most of his life was spent in listening. Everything
about him listened: his round forehead and peering screwed-up eyes, his
lips twitching responsively under the close-clipped moustache, and every
crease and dimple of his sagacious and humorous young countenance; even
the attitude of his short fat body, with elbows comfortably bedded in
heaped up papers, and fingers plunged into his crinkled hair. There was
never a hint of hurry or impatience about him: having once asserted his
right to do what he liked with his life, he was apparently content to
let all his friends prey on it. You never caught his eye on the clock,
or his lips shaping an answer before you had turned the last corner of
your story. Yet when the story was told, and he had surveyed it in all
its bearings, you could be sure he would do what he could for you, and
do it before the day was over.

“Very well, Mademoiselle,” he said, when the young woman had finished.
“I promise you I’ll see Mme. Beausite, and try to get her to recognize
your claim.”

“Mind you, I don’t ask charity?I won’t _take_ charity from your
committee!” the young lady hissed, gathering up a tawdry hand-bag.

“Oh, we’re not forcing it on any one,” smiled Boylston, opening the door
for her.

When he turned back to Campton his face was flushed and frowning. “Poor
thing! She’s a nuisance, but I’ll fight to the last ditch for her. The
chap she lives with was Beausite’s secretary and understudy, and
devilled for him before the war. The poor fellow has come back from the
front a complete wreck, and can’t even collect the salary Beausite owes
him for the last three months before the war. Beausite’s plea is that
he’s too poor, and that the war lets him out of paying. Of course he
counts on our doing it for him.”

“And you’re not going to?”

“Well,” said Boylston humorously, “I shouldn’t wonder if he beat us in
the long run. But I’ll have a try first; and anyhow the poor girl
needn’t know. She used to earn a little money doing fashion-articles,
but of course there’s no market for that now, and I don’t see how the
pair can live. They have a little boy, and there’s an infirm mother, and
they’re waiting to get married till the girl can find a job.”

“Good Lord!” Campton groaned, with a sudden vision of the countless
little trades and traffics arrested by the war, and all the industrious
thousands reduced to querulous pauperism or slow death.

“How _do_ they live?all these people?”

“They don’t?always. I could tell you??”

“Don’t, for God’s sake; I can’t stand it.” Campton drew out the cheque.
“Here: this is what I’ve got for the Davrils.”

“Good Lord!” said Boylston, staring with round eyes.

“It will pull them through, anyhow, won’t it?” Campton triumphed.

“Well??” said Boylston. “It will if you’ll endorse it,” he added,
smiling. Campton laughed and took up a pen.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A day or two later Campton, returning home one afternoon, overtook a
small black-veiled figure with a limp like his own. He guessed at once
that it was the lame Davril girl, come to thank him; and his dislike of
such ceremonies caused him to glance about for a way of escape. But as
he did so the girl turned with a smile that put him to shame. He
remembered Adele Anthony’s saying, one day when he had found her in her
refugee office patiently undergoing a like ordeal: “We’ve no right to
refuse the only coin they can repay us in.”

The Davril girl was a plain likeness of her brother, with the same
hungry flame in her eyes. She wore the nondescript black that Campton
had remarked at the funeral; and knowing the importance which the French
attach to every detail of conventional mourning, he wondered that mother
and daughter had not laid out part of his gift in crape. But doubtless
the equally strong instinct of thrift had caused Mme. Davril to put away
the whole sum.

Mlle. Davril greeted Campton pleasantly, and assured him that she had
not found the long way from Villejuif to Montmartre too difficult.

“I would have gone to you,” the painter protested; but she answered that
she wanted to see with her own eyes where her brother’s friend lived.

In the studio she looked about her with a quick searching glance, said
“Oh, a piano??” as if the fact were connected with the object of her
errand?and then, settling herself in an armchair, unclasped her shabby
hand-bag.

“Monsieur, there has been a misunderstanding; this money is not ours.”
She laid Campton’s cheque on the table.

A flush of annoyance rose to the painter’s face. What on earth had
Boylston let him in for? If the Davrils were as proud as all that it was
not worth while to have sold a sketch it had cost him such a pang to
part with. He felt the exasperation of the would be philanthropist when
he first discovers that nothing complicates life as much as doing good.

“But, Mademoiselle??”

“This money is not ours. If Rene had lived he would never have sold your
picture; and we would starve rather than betray his trust.”

When stout ladies in velvet declare that they would starve rather than
sacrifice this or that principle, the statement has only the cold beauty
of rhetoric; but on the drawn lips of a thinly-clad young woman
evidently acquainted with the process, it becomes a fiery reality.

“Starve?nonsense! My dear young lady, you betray him when you talk like
that,” said Campton, moved.

She shook her head. “It depends, Monsieur, which things matter most to
one. We shall never?my mother and I?do anything that Rene would not have
done. The picture was not ours: we brought it back to you??”

“But if the picture’s not yours it’s mine,” Campton interrupted; “and
I’d a right to sell it, and a right to do what I choose with the money.”

His visitor smiled. “That’s what we feel; it was what I was coming to.”
And clasping her threadbare glove-tips about the arms of the chair Mlle.
Davril set forth with extreme precision the object of her visit.

It was to propose that Campton should hand over the cheque to “The
Friends of French Art,” devoting one-third to the aid of the families of
combatant painters, the rest to young musicians and authors. “It doesn’t
seem right that only the painters’ families should benefit by what your
committee are doing. And Rene would have thought so too. He knew so many
young men of letters and journalists who, before the war, just managed
to keep their families alive; and in my profession I could tell you of
poor music-teachers and accompanists whose work stopped the day war
broke out, and who have been living ever since on the crusts their
luckier comrades could spare them. Rene would have let us accept from
you help that was shared with others: he would have been so glad, often,
of a few francs to relieve the misery we see about us. And this great
sum might be the beginning of a co-operative work for artists ruined by
the war.”

She went on to explain that in the families of almost all the young
artists at the front there was at least one member at home who practised
one of the arts, or who was capable of doing some kind of useful work.
The value of Campton’s gift, Mlle. Davril argued, would be tripled if it
were so employed as to give the artists and their families occupation:
producing at least the illusion that those who could were earning their
living, or helping their less fortunate comrades. “It’s not only a
question of saving their dignity: I don’t believe much in that. You have
dignity or you haven’t?and if you have, it doesn’t need any saving,”
this clear-toned young woman remarked. “The real question, for all of us
artists, is that of keeping our hands in, and our interest in our work
alive; sometimes, too, of giving a new talent its first chance. At any
rate, it would mean work and not stagnation; which is all that most
charity produces.”

She developed her plan: for the musicians, concerts in private houses
(hence her glance at the piano); for the painters, small exhibitions in
the rooms of the committee, where their pictures would be sold with the
deduction of a percentage, to be returned to the general fund; and for
the writers?well, their lot was perhaps the hardest to deal with; but an
employment agency might be opened, where those who chose could put their
names down and take such work as was offered. Above all, Mlle. Davril
again insisted, the fund created by Campton’s gift was to be spent only
in giving employment, not for mere relief.

Campton listened with growing attention. Nothing hitherto had been less
in the line of his interests than the large schemes of general
amelioration which were coming to be classed under the transatlantic
term of “Social Welfare.” If questioned on the subject a few months
earlier he would probably have concealed his fundamental indifference
under the profession of an extreme individualism, and the assertion of
every man’s right to suffer and starve in his own way. Even since Rene
Davril’s death had brought home to him the boundless havoc of the war,
he had felt no more than the impulse to ease his own pain by putting his
hand in his pocket when a particular case was too poignant to be
ignored.

Yet here were people who had already offered their dearest to France,
and were now pleading to be allowed to give all the rest; and who had
had the courage and wisdom to think out in advance the form in which
their gift would do most good. Campton had the awe of the unpractical
man for anyone who knows how to apply his ideas. He felt that there was
no use in disputing Mlle. Davril’s plan: he must either agree to it or
repocket his cheque.

“I’ll do as you want, of course; but I’m not much good about details.
Hadn’t you better consult some one else?” he suggested.

Oh, that was already done: she had outlined her project to Miss Anthony
and Mr. Boylston, who approved. All she wanted was Campton’s consent;
and this he gave the more cordially when he learned that, for the
present at least, nothing more was expected of him. First steps in
beneficence, he felt, were unspeakably terrifying; yet he was already
aware that, resist as he might, he would never be able to keep his
footing on the brink of that abyss.

Into it, as the days went by, his gaze was oftener and oftener plunged.
He had begun to feel that pity was his only remaining link with his
kind, the one barrier between himself and the dreadful solitude which
awaited him when he returned to his studio. What would there have been
to think of there, alone among his unfinished pictures and his broken
memories, if not the wants and woes of people more bereft than himself?
His own future was not a thing to dwell on. George was safe: but what
George and he were likely to make of each other after the ordeal was
over was a question he preferred to put aside. He was more and more
taking George and his safety for granted, as a solid standing-ground
from which to reach out a hand to the thousands struggling in the
depths. As long as the world’s fate was in the balance it was every
man’s duty to throw into that balance his last ounce of brain and
muscle. Campton wondered how he had ever thought that an accident of
birth, a remoteness merely geographical, could justify, or even make
possible, an attitude of moral aloofness. Harvey Mayhew’s reasons for
wishing to annihilate Germany began to seem less grotesque than his own
for standing aside.

In the heat of his conversion he no longer grudged the hours given to
Mr. Mayhew. He patiently led his truculent relative from one government
office to another, everywhere laying stress on Mr. Mayhew’s sympathy
with France and his desire to advocate her cause in the United States,
and trying to curtail his enumeration of his grievances by a glance at
the clock, and the reminder that they had another Minister to see. Mr.
Mayhew was not very manageable. His adventure had grown with repetition,
and he was increasingly disposed to feel that the retaliation he called
down on Germany could best be justified by telling every one what he had
suffered from her. Intensely aware of the value of time in Utica, he was
less sensible of it in Paris, and seemed to think that, since he had
left a flourishing business to preach the Holy War, other people ought
to leave their affairs to give him a hearing. But his zeal and
persistence were irresistible, and doors which Campton had seen barred
against the most reasonable appeals flew open at the sound of Mr.
Mayhew’s trumpet. His pink face and silvery hair gave him an apostolic
air, and circles to which America had hitherto been a mere speck in
space suddenly discovered that he represented that legendary character,
the Typical American.

The keen Boylston, prompt to note and utilize the fact, urged Campton to
interest Mr. Mayhew in “The Friends of French Art,” and with
considerable flourish the former Peace Delegate was produced at a
committee meeting and given his head. But his interest flagged when he
found that the “Friends” concerned themselves with Atrocities only in so
far as any act of war is one, and that their immediate task was the
humdrum one of feeding and clothing the families of the combatants and
sending “comforts” to the trenches. He served up, with a somewhat
dog-eared eloquence, the usual account of his own experiences, and
pressed a modest gift upon the treasurer; but when he departed, after
wringing everybody’s hands, and leaving the French members bedewed with
emotion, Campton had the conviction that their quiet weekly meetings
would not often be fluttered by his presence.

Campton was spending an increasing amount of time in the Palais Royal
restaurant, where he performed any drudgery for which no initiative was
required. Once or twice, when Miss Anthony was submerged by a fresh
influx of refugees, he lent her a hand too; and on most days he dropped
in late at her office, waited for her to sift and dismiss the last
applicants, and saw her home through the incessant rain. It interested
him to note that the altruism she had so long wasted on pampered friends
was developing into a wise and orderly beneficence. He had always
thought of her as an eternal schoolgirl; now she had grown into a woman.
Sometimes he fancied the change dated from the moment when their eyes
had met across the station, the day they had seen George off. He
wondered whether it might not be interesting to paint her new face, if
ever painting became again thinkable.

“Passion?I suppose the great thing is a capacity for passion,” he mused.

In himself he imagined the capacity to be quite dead. He loved his son:
yes?but he was beginning to see that he loved him for certain qualities
he had read into him, and that perhaps after all??. Well, perhaps after
all the sin for which he was now atoning in loneliness was that of
having been too exclusively an artist, of having cherished George too
egotistically and self-indulgently, too much as his own most beautiful
creation. If he had loved him more humanly, more tenderly and
recklessly, might he have not put into his son the tenderness and
recklessness which were beginning to seem to him the qualities most
supremely human?




                                   XV


A week or two later, coming home late from a long day’s work at the
office, Campton saw Mme. Lebel awaiting him.

He always stopped for a word now; fearing each time that there was bad
news of Jules Lebel, but not wishing to seem to avoid her.

To-day, however, Mme. Lebel, though mysterious, was not anxious.

“Monsieur will find the studio open. There’s a lady: she insisted on
going up.”

“A lady? Why did you let her in? What kind of a lady?”

“A lady?well, a lady with such magnificent furs that one couldn’t keep
her out in the cold,” Mme. Lebel answered with simplicity.

Campton went up apprehensively. The idea of unknown persons in
possession of his studio always made him nervous. Whoever they were,
whatever errands they came on, they always?especially women?disturbed
the tranquil course of things, faced him with unexpected problems,
unsettled him in one way or another. Bouncing in on people suddenly was
like dynamiting fish: it left him with his mind full of fragments of
dismembered thoughts.

As he entered he perceived from the temperate atmosphere that Mme. Lebel
had not only opened the studio but made up the fire. The lady’s furs
must indeed be magnificent.

She sat at the farther end of the room, in a high-backed chair near the
stove, and when she rose he recognized his former wife. The long sable
cloak, which had slipped back over the chair, justified Mme. Lebel’s
description, but the dress beneath it appeared to Campton simpler than
Mrs. Brant’s habitual raiment. The lamplight, striking up into her
powdered face, puffed out her under-lids and made harsh hollows in her
cheeks. She looked frightened, ill and yet determined.

“John??” she began, laying her hand on his sleeve.

It was the first time she had ever set foot in his shabby quarters, and
in his astonishment he could only stammer out: “Julia??”

But as he looked at her he saw that her face was wet with tears.
“Not?bad news?” he broke out.

She shook her head and, drawing a handkerchief from a
diamond-monogrammed bag, wiped away the tears and the powder. Then she
pressed the handkerchief to her lips, gazing at him with eyes as
helpless as a child’s.

“Sit down,” said Campton.

As they faced each other across the long table, with papers and
paint-rags and writing materials pushed aside to make room for the
threadbare napkin on which his plate and glass, and bottle of _vin
ordinaire_, were set out, he wondered if the scene woke in her any
memory of their first days of gaiety and poverty, or if she merely
pitied him for still living in such squalor. And suddenly it occurred to
him that when the war was over, and George came back, it would be
pleasant to hunt out a little apartment in an old house in the Faubourg
St. Germain, put some good furniture in it, and oppose the discreeter
charm of such an interior to the heavy splendours of the Avenue Marigny.
How could he expect to hold a luxury-loving youth if he had only this
dingy studio to receive him in?

Mrs. Brant began to speak.

“I came here to see you because I didn’t wish any one to know; not
Adele, nor even Anderson.” Leaning toward him she went on in short
breathless sentences: “I’ve just left Madge Talkett: you know her, I
think? She’s at Mme. de Dolmetsch’s hospital. Something dreadful has
happened ... too dreadful. It seems that Mme. de Dolmetsch was very much
in love with Ladislas Isador; a writer, wasn’t he? I don’t know his
books, but Madge tells me they’re wonderful ... and of course men like
that ought not to be sent to the front....”

“Men like what?”

“Geniuses,” said Mrs. Brant. “He was dreadfully delicate besides, and
was doing admirable work on some military commission in Paris; I believe
he knew any number of languages. And poor Mme. de Dolmetsch?you know
I’ve never approved of her; but things are so changed nowadays, and at
any rate she was madly attached to him, and had done everything to keep
him in Paris: medical certificates, people at Headquarters working for
her, and all the rest. But it seems there are no end of officers always
intriguing to get staff-jobs: strong able-bodied young men who ought to
be in the trenches, and are fit for nothing else, but who are jealous of
the others. And last week, in spite of all she could do, poor Isador was
ordered to the front.”

Campton made an impatient movement. It was even more distasteful to him
to be appealed to by Mrs. Brant in Isador’s name than by Mme. de
Dolmetsch in George’s. His gorge rose at the thought that people should
associate in their minds cases as different as those of his son and Mme.
de Dolmetsch’s lover.

“I’m sorry,” he said. “But if you’ve come to ask me to do something more
about George?take any new steps?it’s no use. I can’t do the sort of
thing to keep my son safe that Mme. de Dolmetsch would do for her
lover.”

Mrs. Brant stared. “Safe? He was killed the day after he got to the
front.”

“Good Lord?Isador?”

Ladislas Isador killed at the front! The words remained unmeaning; by no
effort could Campton relate them to the fat middle-aged philanderer with
his Jewish eyes, his Slav eloquence, his Levantine gift for getting on,
and for getting out from under. Campton tried to picture the clever
contriving devil drawn in his turn into that merciless red eddy, and
gulped down the Monster’s throat with the rest. What a mad world it was,
in which the same horrible and magnificent doom awaited the coward and
the hero!

“Poor Mme. de Dolmetsch!” he muttered, remembering with a sense of
remorse her desperate appeal and his curt rebuff. Once again the poor
creature’s love had enlightened her, and she had foreseen what no one
else in the world would have believed: that her lover was to die like a
hero.

“Isador was nearly forty, and had a weak heart; and she’d left nothing,
literally nothing, undone to save him.” Campton read in his wife’s eyes
what was coming. “It’s impossible _now_ that George should not be
taken,” Mrs. Brant went on.

The same thought had tightened Campton’s own heart-strings; but he had
hoped she would not say it.

“It may be George’s turn any day,” she insisted.

They sat and looked at each other without speaking; then she began again
imploringly: “I tell you there’s not a moment to be lost!”

Campton picked up a palette-knife and began absently to rub it with an
oily rag. Mrs. Brant’s anguished voice still sounded on. “Unless
something is done immediately.... It appears there’s a regular hunt for
_embusques_, as they’re called. As if it was everybody’s business to be
killed! How’s the staff-work to be carried on if they’re all taken? But
it’s certain that if we don’t act at once ... act energetically....”

He fixed his eyes on hers. “Why do you come to _me_?” he asked.

Her lids opened wide. “But he’s our child.”

“Your husband knows more people?he has ways, you’ve often told me??”

She reddened faintly and seemed about to speak; but the reply died on
her lips.

“Why did you say,” Campton pursued, “that you had come here because you
wanted to see me without Brant’s knowing it?”

She lowered her eyes and fixed them on the knife he was still
automatically rubbing.

“Because Anderson thinks.... Anderson won’t.... He says he’s done all he
can.”

“Ah??” cried Campton, drawing a deep breath. He threw back his
shoulders, as if to shake off a weight. “I?feel exactly as Brant does,”
he declared.

“You?you feel as he does? You, George’s father? But a father has never
done all he can for his son! There’s always something more that he can
do!”

The words, breaking from her in a cry, seemed suddenly to change her
from an ageing doll into a living and agonized woman. Campton had never
before felt as near to her, as moved to the depths by her. For the
length of a heart-beat he saw her again with a red-haired baby in her
arms, the light of morning on her face.

“My dear?I’m sorry.” He laid his hand on hers.

“Sorry?sorry? I don’t want you to be sorry. I want you to do something?I
want you to save him!”

He faced her with bent head, gazing absently at their interwoven
fingers: each hand had forgotten to release the other.

“I can’t do anything more,” he repeated.

She started up with a despairing exclamation. “What’s happened to you?
Who has influenced you? What has changed you?”

How could he answer her? He hardly knew himself: had hardly been
conscious of the change till she suddenly flung it in his face. If blind
animal passion be the profoundest as well as the fiercest form of
attachment, his love for his boy was at that moment as nothing to hers.
Yet his feeling for George, in spite of all the phrases he dressed it
in, had formerly in its essence been no other. That his boy should
survive?survive at any price?that had been all he cared for or sought to
achieve. It had been convenient to justify himself by arguing that
George was not bound to fight for France; but Campton now knew that he
would have made the same effort to protect his son if the country
engaged had been his own.

In the careless pre-war world, as George himself had once said, it had
seemed unbelievable that people should ever again go off and die in a
ditch to oblige anybody. Even now, the automatic obedience of the
millions of the untaught and the unthinking, though it had its deep
pathetic significance, did not move Campton like the clear-eyed
sacrifice of the few who knew why they were dying. Jean Fortin, Rene
Davril, and such lads as young Louis Dastrey, with his reasoned horror
of butchery and waste in general, and his instant grasp of the necessity
of this particular sacrifice: it was they who had first shed light on
the dark problem.

Campton had never before, at least consciously, thought of himself and
the few beings he cared for as part of a greater whole, component
elements of the immense amazing spectacle. But the last four months had
shown him man as a defenceless animal suddenly torn from his shell,
stripped of all the interwoven tendrils of association, habit,
background, daily ways and words, daily sights and sounds, and flung out
of the human habitable world into naked ether, where nothing breathes or
lives. That was what war did; that was why those who best understood it
in all its farthest-reaching abomination willingly gave their lives to
put an end to it.

He heard Mrs. Brant crying.

“Julia,” he said, “Julia, I wish you’d try to see....”

She dashed away her tears. “See what? All I see is _you_, sitting here
safe and saying you can do nothing to save him! But to have the right to
say that you ought to be in the trenches yourself! What do you suppose
those young men out there think of their fathers, safe at home, who are
too high-minded and conscientious to protect them?”

He looked at her compassionately. “Yes,” he said, “that’s the bitterest
part of it. But for that, there would hardly be anything in the worst
war for us old people to lie awake about.”

Mrs. Brant had stood up and was feverishly pulling on her gloves: he saw
that she no longer heard him. He helped her to draw her furs about her,
and stood waiting while she straightened her veil and tapped the waves
of hair into place, her eyes blindly seeking for a mirror. There was
nothing more that either could say.

He lifted the lamp, and went out of the door ahead of her.

“You needn’t come down,” she said in a sob; but leaning over the rail
into the darkness he answered: “I’ll give you a light: the concierge has
forgotten the lamp on the stairs.”

He went ahead of her down the long greasy flights, and as they reached
the ground floor he heard a noise of feet coming and going, and
frightened voices exclaiming. In the doorway of the porter’s lodge Mrs.
Brant’s splendid chauffeur stood looking on compassionately at a group
of women gathered about Mme. Lebel.

The old woman sat in her den, her arms stretched across the table, her
sewing fallen at her feet. On the table lay an open letter. The grocer’s
wife from the corner stood by, sobbing.

Mrs. Brant stopped, and Campton, sure now of what was coming, pushed his
way through the neighbours about the door. Mme. Lebel’s eyes met his
with the mute reproach of a tortured animal. “Jules,” she said, “last
Wednesday ... through the heart.”

Campton took her old withered hand. The women ceased sobbing and a hush
fell upon the stifling little room. When Campton looked up again he saw
Julia Brant, pale and bewildered, hurrying toward her motor, and the
vault of the porte-cochere sent back the chauffeur’s answer to her
startled question: “Poor old lady?yes, her only son’s been killed at the
front.”




                                  XVI


Campton sat with his friend Dastrey in the latter’s pleasant little
_entresol_ full of Chinese lacquer and Venetian furniture.

Dastrey, in the last days of January, had been sent home from his
ambulance with an attack of rheumatism; and when it became clear that he
could no longer be of use in the mud and cold of the army zone he had
reluctantly taken his place behind a desk at the Ministry of War. The
friends had dined early, so that he might get back to his night shift;
and they sat over coffee and liqueurs, the mist of their cigars floating
across lustrous cabinet-fronts and the worn gilding of slender consoles.

On the other side of the hearth young Boylston, sunk in an armchair,
smoked and listened.

“It always comes back to the same thing,” Campton was saying nervously.
“What right have useless old men like me, sitting here with my cigar by
this good fire, to preach blood and butchery to boys like George and
your nephew?”

Again and again, during the days since Mrs. Brant’s visit, he had turned
over in his mind the same torturing question. How was he to answer that
last taunt of hers?

Not long ago, Paul Dastrey would have seemed the last person to whom he
could have submitted such a problem. Dastrey, in the black August days,
starting for the front in such a frenzy of baffled blood-lust, had
remained for Campton the type of man with whom it was impossible to
discuss the war. But three months of hard service in _Postes de Secours_
and along the awful battle-edge had sent him home with a mind no longer
befogged by personal problems. He had done his utmost, and knew it; and
the fact gave him the professional calm which keeps surgeons and nurses
steady through all the horrors they are compelled to live among. Those
few months had matured and mellowed him more than a lifetime of Paris.

He leaned back with half-closed lids, quietly considering his friend’s
difficulty.

“I see. Your idea is that, being unable to do even the humble kind of
job that I’ve been assigned to, you’ve no right _not_ to try to keep
your boy out of it if you can?”

“Well?by any honourable means.”

Dastrey laughed faintly, and Campton reddened. “The word’s not happy, I
admit.”

“I wasn’t thinking of that: I was considering how the meaning had
evaporated out of lots of our old words, as if the general smash-up had
broken their stoppers. So many of them, you see,” said Dastrey smiling,
“we’d taken good care not to uncork for centuries. Since I’ve been on
the edge of what’s going on fifty miles from here a good many of my own
words have lost their meaning, and I’m not prepared to say where honour
lies in a case like yours.” He mused a moment, and then went on: “What
would George’s view be?”

Campton did not immediately reply. Not so many weeks ago he would have
welcomed the chance of explaining that George’s view, thank God, had
remained perfectly detached and objective, and that the cheerful
acceptance of duties forcibly imposed on him had not in the least
obscured his sense of the fundamental injustice of his being mixed up in
the thing at all.

But how could he say this now? If George’s view were still what his
father had been in the habit of saying it was, then he held that view
alone: Campton himself no longer thought that any civilized man could
afford to stand aside from such a conflict.

“As far as I know,” he said, “George hasn’t changed his mind.”

Boylston stirred in his armchair, knocked the ash from his cigar, and
looked up at the ceiling.

“Whereas _you_??” Dastrey suggested.

“Yes,” said Campton. “I feel differently. You speak of the difference of
having been in contact with what’s going on out there. But how can
anybody _not_ be in contact, who has any imagination, any sense of right
and wrong? Do these pictures and hangings ever shut it out from you?or
those books over there, when you turn to them after your day’s work?
Perhaps they do, because you’ve got a real job, a job you’ve been
ordered to do, and can’t not do. But for a useless drifting devil like
me?my God, the sights and the sounds of it are always with me!”

“There are a good many people who wouldn’t call you useless, Mr.
Campton,” said Boylston.

Campton shook his head. “I wish there were any healing in the kind of
thing I’m doing; perhaps there is to you, to whom it appears to come
naturally to love your kind.” (Boylston laughed.) “Service is of no use
without conviction: that’s one of the uncomfortable truths this stir-up
has brought to the surface. I was meant to paint pictures in a world at
peace, and I should have more respect for myself if I could go on
unconcernedly doing it, instead of pining to be in all the places where
I’m not wanted, and should be of no earthly use. That’s why??” he
paused, looked about him, and sought understanding in Dastrey’s friendly
gaze: “That’s why I respect George’s opinion, which really consists in
not having any, and simply doing without comment the work assigned to
him. The whole thing is so far beyond human measure that one’s
individual rage and revolt seem of no more use than a woman’s scream at
an accident she isn’t in.”

Even while he spoke, Campton knew he was arguing only against himself.
He did not in the least believe that any individual sentiment counted
for nothing at such a time, and Dastrey really spoke for him in
rejoining: “Every one can at least contribute an attitude: as you have,
my dear fellow. Boylston’s here to confirm it.”

Boylston grunted his assent.

“An attitude?an attitude?” Campton retorted. “The word is revolting to
me! Anything a man like me can do is too easy to be worth doing. And as
for anything one can _say_: how dare one say anything, in the face of
what is being done out there to keep this room and this fire, and this
ragged end of life, safe for such survivals as you and me?” He crossed
to the table to take another cigar. As he did so he laid an apologetic
pressure on his host’s shoulder. “Men of our age are the chorus of the
tragedy, Dastrey; we can’t help ourselves. As soon as I open my lips to
blame or praise I see myself in white petticoats, with a long beard held
on by an elastic, goading on the combatants in a cracked voice from a
safe corner of the ramparts. On the whole I’d sooner be spinning among
the women.”

“Well,” said Dastrey, getting up, “I’ve got to get back to my spinning
at the Ministry; where, by the way, there are some very pretty young
women at the distaff. It’s extraordinary how much better pretty girls
type than plain ones; I see now why they get all the jobs.”

The three went out into the winter blackness. They were used by this
time to the new Paris: to extinguished lamps, shuttered windows,
deserted streets, the almost total cessation of wheeled traffic. All
through the winter, life had seemed in suspense everywhere, as much on
the battle-front as in the rear. Day after day, week after week, of rain
and sleet and mud; day after day, week after week, of vague
non-committal news from west and east; everywhere the enemy baffled but
still menacing, everywhere death, suffering, destruction, without any
perceptible oscillation of the scales, any compensating hope of good to
come out of the long slow endless waste. The benumbed and darkened Paris
of those February days seemed the visible image of a benumbed and
darkened world.

Down the empty asphalt sheeted with rain the rare street lights
stretched interminable reflections. The three men crossed the bridge and
stood watching the rush of the Seine. Below them gloomed the vague bulk
of deserted bath-houses, unlit barges, river-steamers out of commission.
The Seine too had ceased to live: only a single orange gleam, low on the
water’s edge, undulated on the jetty waves like a streamer of seaweed.

The two Americans left Dastrey at his Ministry, and the painter strolled
on to Boylston’s lodging before descending to the underground railway.
He, whom his lameness had made so heavy and indolent, now limped about
for hours at a time over wet pavements and under streaming skies: these
midnight tramps had become a sort of expiatory need to him. “Out
there?out there, if they had these wet stones under them they’d think it
was the floor of heaven,” he used to muse, driving on obstinately
through rain and darkness.

The thought of “Out there” besieged him day and night, the phrase was
always in his ears. Wherever he went he was pursued by visions of that
land of doom: visions of fathomless mud, rat-haunted trenches, freezing
nights under the sleety sky, men dying in the barbed wire between the
lines or crawling out to save a comrade and being shattered to death on
the return. His collaboration with Boylston had brought Campton into
close contact with these things. He knew by heart the history of scores
and scores of young men of George’s age who were doggedly suffering and
dying a few hours away from the Palais Royal office where their records
were kept. Some of these histories were so heroically simple that the
sense of pain was lost in beauty, as though one were looking at
suffering transmuted into poetry. But others were abominable,
unendurable, in their long-drawn useless horror: stories of cold and
filth and hunger, of ineffectual effort, of hideous mutilation, of men
perishing of thirst in a shell-hole, and half-dismembered bodies
dragging themselves back to shelter only to die as they reached it.
Worst of all were the perpetually recurring reports of military
blunders, medical neglect, carelessness in high places: the torturing
knowledge of the lives that might have been saved if this or that
officer’s brain, this or that surgeon’s hand, had acted more promptly.
An impression of waste, confusion, ignorance, obstinacy, prejudice, and
the indifference of selfishness or of mortal fatigue, emanated from
these narratives written home from the front, or faltered out by white
lips on hospital pillows.

“The Friends of French Art,” especially since they had enlarged their
range, had to do with young men accustomed to the freest exercise of
thought and criticism. A nation in arms does not judge a war as simply
as an army of professional soldiers. All these young intelligences were
so many subtly-adjusted instruments for the testing of the machinery of
which they formed a part; and not one accepted the results passively.
Yet in one respect all were agreed: the “had to be” of the first day was
still on every lip. The German menace must be met: chance willed that
theirs should be the generation to meet it; on that point speculation
was vain and discussion useless. The question that stirred them all was
how the country they were defending was helping them to carry on the
struggle. There the evidence was cruelly clear, the comment often
scathingly explicit; and Campton, bending still lower over the abyss,
caught a shuddering glimpse of what might be?must be?if political
blunders, inertia, tolerance, perhaps even evil ambitions and
connivances, should at last outweigh the effort of the front. There was
no logical argument against such a possibility. All civilizations had
their orbit; all societies rose and fell. Some day, no doubt, by the
action of that law, everything that made the world livable to Campton
and his kind would crumble in new ruins above the old. Yes?but woe to
them by whom such things came; woe to the generation that bowed to such
a law! The Powers of Darkness were always watching and seeking their
hour; but the past was a record of their failures as well as of their
triumphs. Campton, brushing up his history, remembered the great
turning-points of progress, saw how the liberties of England had been
born of the ruthless discipline of the Norman conquest, and how even out
of the hideous welter of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic wars
had come more freedom and a wiser order. The point was to remember that
the efficacy of the sacrifice was always in proportion to the worth of
the victims; and there at least his faith was sure.

He could not, he felt, leave his former wife’s appeal unnoticed; after a
day or two he wrote to George, telling him of Mrs. Brant’s anxiety, and
asking in vague terms if George himself thought any change in his
situation probable. His letter ended abruptly: “I suppose it’s hardly
time yet to ask for leave??”




                                  XVII


Not long after his midnight tramp with Boylston and Dastrey the post
brought Campton two letters. One was postmarked Paris, the other bore
the military frank and was addressed in his son’s hand: he laid it aside
while he glanced at the first. It contained an engraved card:

         +---------------------------------------------------+
         |                                                   |
         |              _Mrs. Anderson Brant_                |
         |                                                   |
         |      _At Home on February 20th at 4 o’clock_      |
         |                                                   |
         |  _Mr. Harvey Mayhew will give an account of his   |
         |                captivity in Germany               |
         |            Mme. de Dolmetsch will sing_           |
         |                                                   |
         |  _For the benefit of the “Friends of French Art   |
         |                    Committee”_                    |
         |                                                   |
         |                _Tickets 100 francs_               |
         |                                                   |
         +---------------------------------------------------+

Enclosed was the circular of the sub-committee in aid of Musicians at
the Front, with which Campton was not directly associated. It bore the
names of Mrs. Talkett, Mme. Beausite and a number of other French and
American ladies.

Campton tossed the card away. He was not annoyed by the invitation: he
knew that Miss Anthony and Mlle. Davril were getting up a series of
drawing-room entertainments for that branch of the charity, and that the
card had been sent to him as a member of the Honorary Committee. But any
reminder of the sort always gave a sharp twitch to the Brant nerve in
him. He turned to George’s letter.

It was no longer than usual; but in other respects it was unlike his
son’s previous communications. Campton read it over two or three times.


“Dear Dad, thanks for yours of the tenth, which must have come to me on
skis, the snow here is so deep.” (There had, in fact, been a heavy
snow-fall in the Argonne). “Sorry mother is bothering about things
again; as you’ve often reminded me, they always have a way of ‘being as
they will be,’ and even war doesn’t seem to change it. Nothing to worry
her in my case?but you can’t expect her to believe that, can you?
Neither you nor I can help it, I suppose.

“There’s one thing that might help, though; and that is, your letting
her feel that you’re a little nearer to her. War makes a lot of things
look differently, especially this sedentary kind of war: it’s rather
like going over all the old odds-and-ends in one’s cupboards. And some
of them do look so foolish.

“I wish you’d see her now and then?just naturally, as if it had
happened. You know you’ve got one Inexhaustible Topic between you. The
said I. T. is doing well, and has nothing new to communicate up to now
except a change of address. Hereafter please write to my Base instead of
directing here, as there’s some chance of a shift of H.Q. The precaution
is probably just a new twist of the old red tape, signifying nothing;
but Base will always reach me if we _are_ shifted. Let mother know, and
explain, please; otherwise she’ll think the unthinkable.

“Interrupted by big drive?quill-drive, of course!

                                “As ever
                         “GEORGIUS SCRIBLERIUS.

“P.S. Don’t be too savage to Uncle Andy either.

“No. 2.?I _had_ thought of leave; but perhaps you’re right about that.”


It was the first time George had written in that way of his mother. His
smiling policy had always been to let things alone, and go on
impartially dividing his devotion between his parents, since they
refused to share even that common blessing. But war gave everything a
new look; and he had evidently, as he put it, been turning over the old
things in his cupboards. How was it possible, Campton wondered, that
after such a turning over he was still content to write “Nothing new to
communicate,” and to make jokes about another big quill-drive? Glancing
at the date of the letter, Campton saw that it had been written on the
day after the first ineffectual infantry assault on Vauquois. And George
was sitting a few miles off, safe in headquarters at Sainte Menehould,
with a stout roof over his head and a beautiful brown gloss on his
boots, scribbling punning letters while his comrades fell back from that
bloody summit....

Suddenly Campton’s eyes filled. No; George had not written that letter
for the sake of the joke: the joke was meant to cover what went before
it. Ah, how young the boy was to imagine that his father would not see!
Yes, as he said, war made so many of the old things look foolish....

Campton set out for the Palais Royal. He felt happier than for a long
time past: the tone of his boy’s letter seemed to correspond with his
own secret change of spirit. He knew the futility of attempting to bring
the Brants and himself together, but was glad that George had made the
suggestion. He resolved to see Julia that afternoon.

At the Palais Royal he found the indefatigable Boylston busy with an
exhibition of paintings sent home from the front, and Mlle. Davril
helping to catalogue them. Lamentable pensioners came and went, bringing
fresh tales of death, fresh details of savagery; the air was dark with
poverty and sorrow. In the background Mme. Beausite flitted about,
tragic and ineffectual. Boylston had not been able to extract a penny
from Beausite for his secretary and the latter’s left-handed family; but
Mme. Beausite had discovered a newly-organized charity which lent money
to “temporarily embarrassed” war-victims; and with an artless
self-satisfaction she had contrived to obtain a small loan for the
victim of her own thrift. “For what other purpose are such charities
founded?” she said, gently disclaiming in advance the praise which Miss
Anthony and Boylston had no thought of offering her. Whenever Campton
came in she effaced herself behind a desk, where she bent her beautiful
white head over a card-catalogue without any perceptible results.

The telephone rang. Boylston, after a moment, looked up from the
receiver.

“Mr. Campton!”

The painter glanced apprehensively at the instrument, which still seemed
to him charged with explosives.

“Take the message, do. The thing always snaps at me.”

There was a listening pause: then Boylston said: “It’s about Upsher??”

Campton started up. “Killed???”

“Not sure. It’s Mr. Brant. The news was wired to the bank; they want you
to break it to Mr. Mayhew.”

“Oh, Lord,” the painter groaned, the boy’s face suddenly rising before
his blurred eyes. Miss Anthony was not at the office that morning, or he
would have turned to her; at least she might have gone with him on his
quest. He could not ask Boylston to leave the office, and he felt that
curious incapacity to deal with the raw fact of sorrow which had often
given an elfin unreality to the most poignant moments of his life. It
was as though experience had to enter into the very substance of his
soul before he could even feel it.

“Other people,” he thought, “would know what to say, and I shan’t....”

Some one, meanwhile, had fetched a cab, and he drove to the Nouveau
Luxe, though with little hope of finding Mr. Mayhew. But Mr. Mayhew had
grown two secretaries, and turned the shrimp-pink drawing-room into an
office. One of the secretaries was there, hammering at a typewriter. She
was a competent young woman, who instantly extracted from her
pocket-diary the fact that her chief was at Mrs. Anderson Brant’s,
rehearsing.

“Rehearsing???”

“Why, yes; he’s to speak at Mrs. Brant’s next week on Atrocities,” she
said, surprised at Campton’s ignorance.

She suggested telephoning; but in the shrunken households of the rich,
where but one or two servants remained, telephoning had become as
difficult as in the understaffed hotels; and after one or two vain
attempts Campton decided to go to the Avenue Marigny. He felt that to
get hold of Mayhew as soon as possible might still in some vague way
help poor Benny?since it was not yet sure that he was dead. “Or else
it’s just the need to rush about,” he thought, conscious that the only
way he had yet found of dealing with calamity was a kind of ant-like
agitation.

On the way the round pink face of Benny Upsher continued to float before
him in its very substance, with the tangibility that only a painter’s
visions wear. “I want to be _in_ this thing,” he heard the boy
repeating, as if impelled by some blind instinct flowing down through
centuries and centuries of persistent childish minds.

“If he or his forebears had ever thought things out he probably would
have been alive and safe to-day,” Campton mused, “like George.... The
average person is always just obeying impulses stored up thousands of
years ago, and never re-examined since.” But this consideration, though
drawn from George’s own philosophy, did not greatly comfort his father.

At the Brants’ a bewildered concierge admitted him and rang a bell which
no one answered. The vestibule and the stairs were piled with bales of
sheeting, bulging jute-bags, stacked-up hospital supplies. A boy in
scout’s uniform swung inadequate legs from the lofty porter’s armchair
beside the table with its monumental bronze inkstand. Finally, from
above, a maid called to Campton to ascend.

In the drawing-room pictures and tapestries, bronzes and _pates
tendres_, had vanished, and a plain moquette replaced the priceless
Savonnerie across whose pompous garlands Campton had walked on the day
of his last visit.

The maid led him to the ball-room. Through double doors of glass Mr.
Mayhew’s oratorical accents, accompanied by faint chords on the piano,
reached Campton’s ears: he paused and looked. At the far end of the
great gilded room, on a platform backed by velvet draperies, stood Mr.
Mayhew, a perfect pearl in his tie and a perfect crease in his trousers.
Beside him was a stage-property tripod surmounted by a classical
perfume-burner; and on it Mme. de Dolmetsch, swathed in black, leaned in
an attitude of affliction.

Beneath the platform a bushy-headed pianist struck an occasional chord
from Chopin’s Dead March; and near the door three or four Red Cross
nurses perched on bales of blankets and listened. Under one of their
coifs Campton recognized Mrs. Talkett. She saw him and made a sign to
the lady nearest her; and the latter, turning, revealed the astonished
eyes of Julia Brant.

Campton’s first impression, while they shook hands under cover of Mr.
Mayhew’s rolling periods, was of his former wife’s gift of adaptation.
She had made herself a nurse’s face; not a theatrical imitation of it
like Mme. de Dolmetsch’s, nor yet the face of a nurse on a war-poster,
like Mrs. Talkett’s. Her lovely hair smoothed away under her strict
coif, her chin devoutly framed in linen, Mrs. Brant looked serious,
tender and efficient. Was it possible that she had found her vocation?

She gave him a glance of alarm, but his eyes must have told her that he
had not come about George, for with a reassured smile she laid a finger
on her lip and pointed to the platform; Campton noticed that her nails
were as beautifully polished as ever.

Mr. Mayhew was saying: “All that I have to give, yes, all that is most
precious to me, I am ready to surrender, to offer up, to lay down in the
Great Struggle which is to save the world from barbarism. I, who was one
of the first Victims of that barbarism....”

He paused and looked impressively at the bales of blankets. The piano
filled in the pause, and Mme. de Dolmetsch, without changing her
attitude, almost without moving her lips, sang a few notes of
lamentation.

“Of that hideous barbarism??” Mr. Mayhew began again. “I repeat that I
stand here ready to give up everything I hold most dear??”

“Do stop him,” Campton whispered to Mrs. Brant.

Little Mrs. Talkett, with the quick intuition he had noted in her,
sprang up and threaded her way to the stage. Mme. de Dolmetsch flowed
from one widowed pose into another, and Mr. Mayhew, majestically
descending, approached Mrs. Brant.

“You agree with me, I hope? You feel that anything more than Mme. de
Dolmetsch’s beautiful voice?anything in the way of a choral
accompaniment?would only weaken my effect? Where the facts are so
overwhelming it is enough to state them; that is,” Mr. Mayhew added
modestly, “if they are stated vigorously and tersely?as I hope they
are.”

Mme. de Dolmetsch, with the gesture of a marble mourner torn from her
cenotaph, glided up behind him and laid her hand in Campton’s.

“Dear friend, you’ve heard?... You remember our talk? I am Cassandra,
cursed with the hideous gift of divination.” Tears rained down her
cheeks, washing off the paint like mud swept by a shower. “My only
comfort,” she added, fixing her perfect eyes on Mr. Mayhew, “is to help
our great good friend in this crusade against the assassins of my
Ladislas.”

Mrs. Talkett had said a word to Mr. Mayhew. Campton saw his complacent
face go to pieces as if it had been vitrioled.

“Benny?Benny??” he screamed, “Benny hurt? My Benny? It’s some mistake!
What makes you think???” His eyes met Campton’s. “Oh, my God! Why, he’s
my sister’s child!” he cried, plunging his face into his soft manicured
hands.

In the cab to which Campton led him, he continued to sob with the
full-throated sobs of a large invertebrate distress, beating his breast
for an unfindable handkerchief, and, when he found it, immediately
weeping it into pulp.

Campton had meant to leave him at the bank; but when the taxi stopped
Mr. Mayhew was in too pitiful a plight for the painter to resist his
entreaty.

“It was you who saw Benny last?you can’t leave me!” the poor man
implored; and Campton followed him up the majestic stairway.

Their names were taken in to Mr. Brant, and with a motion of wonder at
the unaccountable humours of fate, Campton found himself for the first
time entering the banker’s private office.

Mr. Brant was elsewhere in the great glazed labyrinth, and while the
visitors waited, the painter’s registering eye took in the details of
the room, from the Barye _cire-perdue_ on a peach-coloured marble mantel
to the blue morocco armchairs about a giant writing-table. On the table
was an electric lamp in a celadon vase, and just the right number of
neatly folded papers lay under a paper-weight of Chinese crystal. The
room was as tidy as an expensive stage-setting or the cage of a
well-kept canary: the only object marring its order was a telegram lying
open on the desk.

Mr. Brant, grey and glossy, slipped in on noiseless patent leather. He
shook hands with Mr. Mayhew, bowed stiffly but deprecatingly to Campton,
gave his usual cough, and said: “This is terrible.”

And suddenly, as the three men sat there, so impressive and important
and powerless, with that fatal telegram marring the tidiness of the
desk, Campton murmured to himself: “If this thing were to happen to me I
couldn’t bear it.... I simply couldn’t bear it....”

Benny Upsher was not dead?at least his death was not certain. He had
been seen to fall in a surprise attack near Neuve Chapelle; the
telegram, from his commanding officer, reported him as “wounded and
missing.”

The words had taken on a hideous significance in the last months.
Freezing to death between the lines, mutilation and torture, or weeks of
slow agony in German hospitals: these were the alternative visions
associated with the now familiar formula. Mr. Mayhew had spent a part of
his time collecting details about the treatment of those who had fallen,
alive but wounded, into German hands; and Campton guessed that as he sat
there every one of these details, cruel, sanguinary, remorseless, had
started to life, and that all their victims wore the face of Benny.

The wretched man sat speechless, so unhinged and swinging loose in his
grief that Mr. Brant and Campton could only look on, following the
thoughts he was thinking, seeing the sights he was seeing, and each
avoiding the other’s eye lest they should betray to one another the
secret of their shared exultation at George’s safety.

Finally Mr. Mayhew was put in charge of a confidential clerk, who was to
go with him to the English Military Mission in the hope of getting
farther information. He went away, small and shrunken, with the
deprecating smile of a man who seeks to ward off a blow; as he left the
room Campton heard him say timidly to the clerk: “No doubt you speak
French, sir? The words I want don’t seem to come to me.”

Campton had meant to leave at the same time; but some vague impulse held
him back. He remembered George’s postscript: “Don’t be too savage to
Uncle Andy,” and wished he could think of some friendly phrase to ease
off his leave-taking. Mr. Brant seemed to have the same wish. He stood,
erect and tightly buttoned, one small hand resting on the arm of his
desk-chair, as though he were posing for a cabinet size, with the
photographer telling him to look natural. His lids twitched behind his
protective glasses, and his upper lip, which was as straight as a ruler,
detached itself by a hair’s breadth from the lower; but no word came.

Campton glanced up and down the white-panelled walls, and spoke
abruptly.

“There was no reason on earth,” he said, “why poor young Upsher should
ever have been in this thing.”

Mr. Brant bowed.

“This sort of crazy impulse to rush into other people’s rows,” Campton
continued with rising vehemence, “is of no more use to a civilized state
than any other unreasoned instinct. At bottom it’s nothing but what
George calls the baseball spirit: just an ignorant passion for
fisticuffs.”

Mr. Brant looked at him intently. “When did?George say that?” he asked,
with his usual cough before the name.

Campton coloured. “Oh?er?some time ago: in the very beginning, I think.
It was the view of most thoughtful young fellows at that time.”

“Quite so,” said Mr. Brant, cautiously stroking his moustache.

Campton’s eyes again wandered about the room.

“_Now_, of course??”

“Ah?_now_....”

The two men looked at each other, and Campton held out his hand. Mr.
Brant, growing pink about the forehead, extended his dry fingers, and
they shook hands in silence.




                                 XVIII


In the street Campton looked about him with the same confused sense as
when he had watched Fortin-Lescluze driving away to Chalons, his dead
son’s image in his eyes.

Each time that Campton came in contact with people on whom this calamity
had fallen he grew more acutely aware of his own inadequacy. If he had
been Fortin-Lescluze it would have been impossible for him to go back to
Chalons and resume his task. If he had been Harvey Mayhew, still less
could he have accommodated himself to the intolerable, the really
inconceivable, thought that Benny Upsher had vanished into that fiery
furnace like a crumpled letter tossed into a grate. Young Fortin was
defending his country?but Upsher, in God’s name what was Benny Upsher of
Connecticut doing in a war between the continental powers?

Suddenly Campton remembered that he had George’s letter in his pocket,
and that he had meant to go back with it to Mrs. Brant’s. He had started
out that morning full of the good intentions the letter had inspired;
but now he had no heart to carry them out. Yet George had said: “Let
mother know, and explain, please;” and such an injunction could not be
disregarded.

He was still hesitating on a street corner when he remembered that Miss
Anthony was probably on her way home for luncheon, and that if he made
haste he might find her despatching her hurried meal. It was instinctive
with him, in difficult hours, to turn to her, less for counsel than for
shelter; her simple unperplexed view of things was as comforting as his
mother’s solution of the dark riddles he used to propound in the
nursery.

He found her in her little dining-room, with Delft plates askew on
imitation Cordova leather, and a Death’s Head Pennon and a Prussian
helmet surmounting the nymph in cast bronze on the mantelpiece. In
entering he faced the relentless light of a ground-glass window opening
on an air-shaft; and Miss Anthony, flinging him a look, dropped her fork
and sprang up crying: “George??”

“George?why George?” Campton recovered his presence of mind under the
shock of her agitation. “What made you think of George?”

“Your?your face,” she stammered, sitting down again. “So absurd of
me.... But you looked.... A seat for monsieur, Jeanne,” she cried over
her shoulder to the pantry.

“Ah?my face? Yes, I suppose so. Benny Upsher has disappeared?I’ve just
had to break it to Mayhew.”

“Oh, that poor young Upsher? How dreadful!” Her own face grew instantly
serene. “I’m so sorry?so very sorry.... Yes, yes, you _shall_ lunch with
me?I know there’s another cutlet,” she insisted.

He shook his head. “I couldn’t.”

“Well, then, I’ve finished.” She led the way into the drawing-room.
There it was her turn to face the light, and he saw that her own
features were as perturbed as she had apparently discovered his to be.

“Poor Benny, poor boy!” she repeated, in the happy voice she might have
had if she had been congratulating Campton on the lad’s escape. He saw
that she was still thinking not of Upsher but of George, and her
inability to fit her intonation to her words betrayed the violence of
her relief. But why had she imagined George to be in danger?

Campton recounted the scene at which he had just assisted, and while she
continued to murmur her sympathy he asked abruptly: “Why on earth should
you have been afraid for George?”

Miss Anthony had taken her usual armchair. It was placed, as the
armchairs of elderly ladies usually are, with its high back to the
light, and Campton could no longer observe the discrepancy between her
words and her looks. This probably gave her laugh its note of
confidence. “My dear, if you were to cut me open George’s name would run
out of every vein,” she said.

“But in that tone?it was your tone. You thought he’d been?that something
had happened,” Campton insisted. “How could it, where he is?”

She shrugged her shoulders in the “foreign” way she had picked up in her
youth. The gesture was as incongruous as her slang, but it had become
part of her physical self, which lay in a loose mosaic of incongruities
over the solid crystal block of her character.

“Why, indeed? I suppose there are risks everywhere, aren’t there?”

“I don’t know.” He pulled out the letter he had received that morning. A
sudden light had illuminated it, and his hand shook. “I don’t even know
where George is any longer.”

She seemed to hesitate for a moment, and then asked calmly: “What do you
mean?”

“Here?look at this. We’re to write to his base. I’m to tell his mother
of the change.” He waited, cursing the faint winter light, and the
protecting back of her chair. “What can it mean,” he broke out, “except
that he’s left Sainte Menehould, that he’s been sent elsewhere, and that
he doesn’t want us to find out where?”

Miss Anthony bent her long nose over the page. Her hand held the letter
steadily, and he guessed, as she perused it, that she had had one of the
same kind, and had already drawn her own conclusions. What they were,
that first startled “George!” seemed to say. But would she ever let
Campton see as far into her thoughts again? He continued to watch her
hands patiently, since nothing was to be discovered of her face. The
hands folded the letter with precision, and handed it back to him.

“Yes: I see why you thought that?one might have,” she surprised him by
conceding. Then, darting at his unprotected face a gaze he seemed to
feel though he could not see it: “If it had meant that George had been
ordered to the front, how would you have felt?” she demanded.

He had not expected the question, and though in the last weeks he had so
often propounded it to himself, it caught him in the chest like a blow.
A sense of humiliation, a longing to lay his weakness bare, suddenly
rose in him, and he bowed his head. “I couldn’t ... I couldn’t bear it,”
he stammered.

She was silent for an interval; then she stood up, and laying her hand
on his shaking shoulder crossed the room to a desk in which he knew she
kept her private papers. Her keys clinked, and a moment later she handed
him a letter. It was in George’s writing, and dated on the same day as
his own.

“Dearest old girl, nothing new but my address. Hereafter please write to
our Base. This order has just been lowered from the empyrean at the end
of an endless reel of red tape. What it means nobody knows. It does not
appear to imply an immediate change of Headquarters; but even if such a
change comes, my job is likely to remain the same. I’m getting used to
it, and no wonder, for one day differeth not from another, and I’ve had
many of them now. Take care of Dad and mother, and of your matchless
self. I’m writing to father to-day. Your George the First?and Last (or
I’ll know why).”

The two letters bore one another out in a way which carried conviction.
Campton saw that his sudden doubts must have been produced (since he had
not felt them that morning) by the agonizing experience he had
undergone: the vision of Benny Upsher had unmanned him. George was safe,
and asked only to remain so: that was evident from both letters. And as
the certainty of his son’s acquiescence once more penetrated Campton it
brought with it a fresh reaction of shame. Ashamed?yes, he had begun to
be ashamed of George as well as of himself. Under the touch of Adele
Anthony’s implacable honesty his last pretenses shrivelled up, and he
longed to abase himself. He lifted his head and looked at her,
remembering all she would be able to read in his eyes.

“You’re satisfied?” she enquired.

“Yes. If that’s the word.” He stretched his hand toward her, and then
drew it back. “But it’s _not_: it’s not the word any longer.” He
laboured with the need of self-expression, and the opposing instinct of
concealing feelings too complex for Miss Anthony’s simple gaze. How
could he say: “I’m satisfied; but I wish to God that George were not”?
And was he satisfied, after all? And how could he define, or even be
sure that he was actually experiencing, a feeling so contradictory that
it seemed to be made up of anxiety for his son’s safety, shame at that
anxiety, shame at George’s own complacent acceptance of his lot, and
terror of a possible change in that lot? There were hours when it seemed
to Campton that the Furies were listening, and ready to fling their
awful answer to him if he as much as whispered to himself: “Would to God
that George were not satisfied!”

The sense of their haunting presence laid its clutch on him, and caused
him, after a pause, to finish his phrase in another tone. “No;
satisfied’s not the word; I’m _glad_ George is out of it!” he exclaimed.

Miss Anthony was folding away the letter as calmly as if it had been a
refugee record. She did not appear to notice the change in Campton’s
voice.

“I don’t pretend to your sublime detachment: you’ve never had a child,”
he sneered. (Certainly, if the Furies were listening, they would put
that down to his credit!)

“Oh, my poor John,” she said; then she locked the desk, took her hat
from the lamp-chimney on which it had been hanging, jammed it down on
her head like a helmet, and remarked: “We’ll go together, shall we? It’s
time I got back to the office.”

On the way downstairs both were silent. Campton’s ears echoed with his
stupid taunt, and he glanced at her without daring to speak. On the last
landing she paused and said: “I’ll see Julia this evening about George’s
change of address. She may be worried; and I can explain?I can take her
my letter.”

“Oh, do,” he assented. “And tell her?tell her?if she needs me??”

It was as much of a message as he found courage for. Miss Anthony
nodded.




                                  XIX


One day Mme. Lebel said: “The first horse-chestnuts are in bloom. And
monsieur must really buy himself some new shirts.”

Campton looked at her in surprise. She spoke in a different voice; he
wondered if she had had good news of her grandchildren. Then he saw that
the furrows in her old face were as deep as ever, and that the change in
her voice was simply an unconscious response to the general stirring of
sap, the spring need to go on living, through everything and in spite of
everything.

_On se fait une raison_, as Mme. Lebel would have said. Life had to go
on, and new shirts had to be bought. No one knew why it was necessary,
but every one felt that it was; and here were the horse-chestnuts once
more actively confirming it. Habit laid its compelling grasp on the
wires of the poor broken marionettes with which the Furies had been
playing, and they responded, though with feebler flappings, to the
accustomed jerk.

In Campton the stirring of the sap had been a cold and languid process,
chiefly felt in his reluctance to go on with his relief work. He had
tried to close his ears to the whispers of his own lassitude, vexed,
after the first impulse of self-dedication, to find that no vocation
declared itself, that his task became each day more tedious as well as
more painful. Theoretically, the pain ought to have stimulated him:
perpetual immersion in that sea of anguish should have quickened his
effort to help the poor creatures sinking under its waves. The woe of
the war had had that effect on Adele Anthony, on young Boylston, on
Mlle. Davril, on the greater number of his friends. But their ardour
left him cold. He wanted to help, he wanted it, he was sure, as
earnestly as they; but the longing was not an inspiration to him, and he
felt more and more that to work listlessly was to work ineffectually.

“I give the poor devils so many boots and money-orders a day; you give
them yourself, and so does Boylston,” he complained to Miss Anthony; who
murmured: “Ah, _Boylston_??” as if that point of the remark were alone
worth noticing.

“At his age too; it’s extraordinary, the way the boy’s got out of
himself.”

“Or into himself, rather. He _was_ a pottering boy before?now he’s a
man, with a man’s sense of things.”

“Yes; but his patience, his way of getting into their minds, their
prejudices, their meannesses, their miseries! He doesn’t seem to me like
the kind who was meant to be a missionary.”

“Not a bit of it.... But he’s burnt up with shame at our not being in
the war?as all the young Americans are.”

Campton made an impatient movement. “Benny Upsher again??! Can’t we let
our government decide all that for us? What else did we elect it for, I
wonder?”

“I wonder,” echoed Miss Anthony.

Talks of this kind were irritating and unprofitable, and Campton did not
again raise the question. Miss Anthony’s vision was too simplifying to
penetrate far into his doubts, and after nearly a year’s incessant
contact with the most savage realities her mind still seemed at ease in
its old formulas.

Simplicity, after all, was the best safeguard in such hours. Mrs. Brant
was as absorbed in her task as Adele Anthony. Since the Brant villa at
Deauville had been turned into a hospital she was always on the road, in
a refulgent new motor emblazoned with a Red Cross, carrying supplies,
rushing down with great surgeons, hurrying back to committee meetings
and conferences with the Service de Sante (for she and Mr. Brant were
now among the leaders in American relief work in Paris), and throwing
open the Avenue Marigny drawing-rooms for concerts, lectures and such
sober philanthropic gaieties as society was beginning to countenance.

On the day when Mme. Lebel told Campton that the horse-chestnuts were in
blossom and he must buy some new shirts he was particularly in need of
such incentives. He had made up his mind to go to see Mrs. Brant about a
concert for “The Friends of French Art” which was to be held in her
house. Ever since George had asked him to see something of his mother
Campton had used the pretext of charitable collaboration as the best way
of getting over their fundamental lack of anything to say to each other.

The appearance of the Champs Elysees confirmed Mme. Lebel’s
announcement. Everywhere the punctual rosy spikes were rising above
unfolding green; and Campton, looking up at them, remembered once
thinking how Nature had adapted herself to the scene in overhanging with
her own pink lamps and green fans the lamps and fans of the _cafes
chantants_ beneath. The latter lights had long since been extinguished,
the fans folded up; and as he passed the bent and broken arches of
electric light, the iron chairs and dead plants in paintless boxes, all
heaped up like the scenery of a bankrupt theatre, he felt the pang of
Nature’s obstinate renewal in a world of death. Yet he also felt the
stir of the blossoming trees in the form of a more restless discontent,
a duller despair, a new sense of inadequacy. How could war go on when
spring had come?

Mrs. Brant, having reduced her household and given over her
drawing-rooms to charity, received in her boudoir, a small room
contrived by a clever upholsterer to simulate a seclusion of which she
had never felt the need. Photographs strewed the low tables; and facing
the door Campton saw George’s last portrait, in uniform, enclosed in an
expensive frame. Campton had received the same photograph, and thrust it
into a drawer; he thought a young man on a safe staff job rather
ridiculous in uniform, and at the same time the sight filled him with a
secret dread.

Mrs. Brant was bidding goodbye to a lady in mourning whom Campton did
not know. His approach through the carpeted antechamber had been
unnoticed, and as he entered the room he heard Mrs. Brant say in French,
apparently in reply to a remark of her visitor: “Bridge, _chere Madame_?
No; not yet. I confess I haven’t the courage to take up my old life. We
mothers with sons at the front....”

“Ah,” exclaimed the other lady, “there I don’t agree with you. I think
one owes it to them to go on as if one were as little afraid as _they_
are. That is what all my sons prefer.... Even,” she added, lowering her
voice but lifting her head higher, “even, I’m sure, the one who is
buried by the Marne.” With a flush on her handsome face she pressed Mrs.
Brant’s hand and passed out.

Mrs. Brant had caught sight of Campton as she received the rebuke. Her
colour rose slightly, and she said with a smile: “So many women can’t
get on without amusement.”

“No,” he agreed. There was a pause, and then he asked: “Who was it?”

“The Marquise de Tranlay?the widow.”

“Where are the sons she spoke of?”

“There are three left: one in the _Chasseurs a Pied_; the youngest, who
volunteered at seventeen, in the artillery in the Argonne; the third,
badly wounded, in hospital at Compiegne. And the eldest killed. I simply
can’t understand....”

“Why,” Campton interrupted, “did you speak as if George were at the
front? Do you usually speak of him in that way?”

Her silence and her deepening flush made him feel the unkindness of the
question. “I didn’t mean ... forgive me,” he said. “Only sometimes, when
I see women like that I’m??”

“Well?” she questioned.

He was silent in his turn, and she did not insist. They sat facing each
other, each forgetting the purpose of their meeting. For the hundredth
time he felt the uselessness of trying to carry out George’s filial
injunction: between himself and George’s mother these months of fiery
trial seemed to have loosed instead of tightening the links.

He wandered back to Montmartre through the bereft and beautiful city.
The light lay on it in wide silvery washes, harmonizing the grey stone,
the pale foliage, and a sky piled with clouds which seemed to rebuild in
translucid masses the monuments below. He caught himself once more
viewing the details of the scene in the terms of his trade. River,
pavements, terraces heavy with trees, the whole crowded sky-line from
Notre Dame to the Pantheon, instead of presenting themselves in their
bare reality, were transposed into a painter’s vision. And the faces
around him became again the starting-point of rapid incessant
combinations of line and colour, as if the visible world were once more
at its old trick of weaving itself into magic designs. The reawakening
of this instinct deepened Campton’s sense of unrest, and made him feel
more than ever unfitted for a life in which such things were no longer
of account, in which it seemed a disloyalty even to think of them.

He returned to the studio, having promised to deal with some office work
which he had carried home the night before. The papers lay on the table;
but he turned to the window and looked out over his budding lilacs at
the new strange Paris. He remembered that it was almost a year since he
had leaned in the same place, gazing down on the wise and frivolous old
city in her summer dishabille while he planned his journey to Africa
with George; and something George had once quoted from Faust came
drifting through his mind: “Take care! You’ve broken my beautiful world!
There’ll be splinters....” Ah, yes, splinters, splinters ... everybody’s
hands were red with them! What retribution devised by man could be
commensurate with the crime of destroying his beautiful world? Campton
sat down to the task of collating office files.

His bell rang, and he started up, as much surprised as if the simplest
events had become unusual. It would be natural enough that Dastrey or
Boylston should drop in?or even Adele Anthony?but his heart beat as if
it might be George. He limped to the door, and found Mrs. Talkett.

She said: “May I come in?” and did so without waiting for his answer.
The rapidity of her entrance surprised him less than the change in her
appearance. But for the one glimpse of her dishevelled elegance, when
she had rushed into Mrs. Brant’s drawing-room on the day after war was
declared, he had seen her only in a nursing uniform, as absorbed in her
work as if it had been a long-thwarted vocation. Now she stood before
him in raiment so delicately springlike that it seemed an emanation of
the day. Care had dropped from her with her professional garb, and she
smiled as though he must guess the reason.

In ordinary times he would have thought: “She’s in love??” but that
explanation was one which seemed to belong to other days. It reminded
him, however, how little he knew of Mrs. Talkett, who, after Rene
Davril’s death, had vanished from his life as abruptly as she had
entered it. Allusions to “the Talketts,” picked up now and again at
Adele Anthony’s, led him to conjecture an invisible husband in the
background; but all he knew of Mrs. Talkett was what she had told him of
her “artistic” yearnings, and what he had been able to divine from her
empty questioning eyes, from certain sweet inflections when she spoke of
her wounded soldiers, and from the precise and finished language with
which she clothed her unfinished and imprecise thoughts. All these
indications made up an image not unlike that of the fashion-plate torn
from its context of which she had reminded him at their first meeting;
and he looked at her with indifference, wondering why she had come.

With an abrupt gesture she pulled the pin from her heavily-plumed hat,
tossed it on the divan, and said: “Dear Master, I just want to sit with
you and have you talk to me.” She dropped down beside her hat, clasped
her thin hands about her thin knee, and broke out, as if she had already
forgotten that she wanted him to talk to her: “Do you know, I’ve made up
my mind to begin to live again?to live my own life, I mean, to be my
real _me_, after all these dreadful months of exile from myself. I see
now _that_ that is my real duty?just as it is yours, just as it is that
of every artist and every creator. Don’t you feel as I do? Don’t you
agree with me? We _must_ save Beauty for the world; before it is too
late we must save it out of this awful wreck and ruin. It sounds
ridiculously presumptuous, doesn’t it, to say ‘we’ in talking of a great
genius like you and a poor little speck of dust like me? But after all
there is the same instinct in us, the same craving, the same desire to
realize Beauty, though you do it so magnificently and so?so objectively,
and I ...” she paused, unclasped her hands, and lifted her lovely
bewildered eyes, “I do it only by a ribbon in my hair, a flower in a
vase, a way of looping a curtain, or placing a lacquer screen in the
right light. But I oughtn’t to be ashamed of my limitations, do you
think I ought? Surely every one ought to be helping to save Beauty;
every one is needed, even the humblest and most ignorant of us, or else
the world will be all death and ugliness. And after all, ugliness is the
only _real_ death, isn’t it?” She drew a deep breath and added: “It has
done me good already to sit here and listen to you.”

Campton, a few weeks previously, would have been amused, or perhaps
merely irritated. But in the interval he had become aware in himself of
the same irresistible craving to “live,” as she put it, and as he had
heard it formulated, that very day, by the mourning mother who had so
sharply rebuked Mrs. Brant. The spring was stirring them all in their
different ways, secreting in them the sap which craved to burst into
bridge-parties, or the painting of masterpieces, or a consciousness of
the need for new shirts.

“But what am I in all this?” Mrs. Talkett rushed on, sparing him the
trouble of a reply. “Nothing but the match that lights the flame!
Sometimes I imagine that I might put what I mean into poetry ... I
_have_ scribbled a few things, you know ... but that’s not what I was
going to tell you. It’s you, dear Master, who must set us the example of
getting back to our work, our real work, whatever it is. What have you
done in all these dreadful months?the real You? Nothing! And the world
will be the poorer for it ever after. Master, you must paint again?you
must begin to-day!”

Campton gave an uneasy laugh. “Oh?paint!” He waved his hand toward the
office files of “The Friends of French Art.” “There’s my work.”

“Not the real you. It’s your dummy’s work?just as my nursing has been
mine. Oh, one did one’s best?but all the while beauty and art and the
eternal things were perishing! And what will the world be like without
them?”

“I shan’t be here,” Campton growled.

“But your son will.” She looked at him profoundly. “You know I know your
son?we’re friends. And I’m sure he would feel as I feel?he would tell
you to go back to your painting.”

For months past any allusion to George had put Campton on his guard,
stiffening him with improvised defences. But this appeal of Mrs.
Talkett’s found him unprepared, demoralized by the spring sweetness, and
by his secret sense of his son’s connivance with it. What was war?any
war?but an old European disease, an ancestral blood-madness seizing on
the first pretext to slake its frenzy? Campton reminded himself again
that he was the son of free institutions, of a country in no way
responsible for the centuries of sinister diplomacy which had brought
Europe to ruin, and was now trying to drag down America. George was
right, the Brants were right, this young woman through whose lips
Campton’s own secret instinct spoke was right.

He was silent so long that she rose with the anxious frown that appeared
to be her way of blushing, and faltered out: “I’m boring you?I’d better
go.”

She picked up her hat and held its cataract of feathers poised above her
slanted head.

“Wait?let me do you like that!” Campton cried. It had never before
occurred to him that she was paintable; but as she stood there with
uplifted arm the long line flowing from her wrist to her hip suddenly
wound itself about him like a net.

“Me?” she stammered, standing motionless, as if frightened by the excess
of her triumph.

“Do you mind?” he queried; and hardly hearing her faltered out: “Mind?
When it was what I came for!” he dragged forth an easel, flung on it the
first canvas he could lay hands on (though he knew it was the wrong
shape and size), and found himself instantly transported into the lost
world which was the only real one.




                                   XX


For a month Campton painted on in transcendent bliss.

His first stroke carried him out of space and time, into a region where
all that had become numbed and atrophied in him could expand and
breathe. Lines, images, colours were again the sole facts: he plunged
into their whirling circles like a stranded sea-creature into the sea.
Once more every face was not a vague hieroglyph, a curtain drawn before
an invisible aggregate of wants and woes, but a work of art, a flower in
a pattern, to be dealt with on its own merits, like a bronze or a jewel.
During the first day or two his hand halted; but the sense of
insufficiency was a goad, and he fought with his subject till he felt a
strange ease in every renovated muscle, and his model became like a
musical instrument on which he played with careless mastery.

He had transferred his easel to Mrs. Talkett’s apartment. It was an odd
patchwork place, full of bold beginnings and doubtful pauses, rash
surrenders to the newest fashions and abrupt insurrections against them,
where Louis Philippe mahogany had entrenched itself against the
aggression of _art nouveau_ hangings, and the frail grace of
eighteenth-century armchairs shed derision on lumpy modern furniture
painted like hobby-horses at a fair. It amused Campton to do Mrs.
Talkett against such a background: her thin personality needed to be
filled out by the visible results of its many quests and cravings. There
were people one could sit down before a blank wall, and all their world
was there, in the curves of their faces and the way their hands lay in
their laps; others, like Mrs. Talkett, seemed to be made out of the
reflection of what surrounded them, as if they had been born of a tricky
grouping of looking-glasses, and would vanish if it were changed.

At first Campton was steeped in the mere sensual joy of his art; but
after a few days the play of the mirrors began to interest him. Mrs.
Talkett had abandoned her hospital work, and was trying, as she said, to
“recreate herself.” In this she was aided by a number of people who
struck Campton as rather too young not to have found some other job, or
too old to care any longer for that particular one. But all this did not
trouble his newly recovered serenity. He seemed to himself, somehow,
like a drowned body?but drowned in a toy aquarium?still staring about
with living eyes, but aware of the other people only as shapes swimming
by with a flash of exotic fins. They were enclosed together, all of
them, in an unreal luminous sphere, mercifully screened against the
reality from which a common impulse of horror had driven them; and since
he was among them it was not his business to wonder at the others. So,
through the cloud of his art, he looked out on them impartially.

The high priestess of the group was Mme. de Dolmetsch, with Harvey
Mayhew as her acolyte. Mr. Mayhew was still in pursuit of Atrocities: he
was in fact almost the only member of the group who did not rather
ostentatiously disavow the obligation to “carry on.” But he had
discovered that to discharge this sacred task he must vary it by
frequent intervals of relaxation. He explained to Campton that he had
found it to be “his duty to rest”; and he was indefatigable in the
performance of duty. He had therefore, with an expenditure of eloquence
which Campton thought surprisingly slight, persuaded Boylston to become
his understudy, and devote several hours a day to the whirling
activities of the shrimp-pink Bureau of Atrocities at the Nouveau Luxe.
Campton, at first, could not understand how the astute Boylston had
allowed himself to be drawn into the eddy; but it turned out that
Boylston’s astuteness had drawn him in. “You see, there’s an awful lot
of money to be got out of it, one way and another, and I know a use for
every penny?that is, Miss Anthony and I do,” the young man modestly
explained; adding, in response to the painter’s puzzled stare, that Mr.
Mayhew’s harrowing appeals were beginning to bring from America immense
sums for the Victims, and that Mr. Mayhew, while immensely gratified by
the effect of his eloquence, and the prestige it was bringing him in
French social and governmental circles, had not the cloudiest notion how
the funds should be used, and had begged Boylston to advise him. It was
owing to this that the ex-Delegate to the Hague was able, with a light
conscience, to seek the repose of Mrs. Talkett’s company and, with a
smile of the widest initiation, to listen to the subversive conversation
of her familiars.

“Subversive” was the motto of the group. Every one was engaged in
attacking some theory of art or life or letters which nobody in
particular defended. Even Mr. Talkett?a kindly young man with
eye-glasses and glossy hair, who roamed about straightening the
furniture, like a gentlemanly detective watching the presents at a
wedding?owned to Campton that _he_ was subversive; and on the painter’s
pressing for a definition, added: “Why, I don’t believe in anything
_she_ doesn’t believe in,” while his eye-glasses shyly followed his
wife’s course among the teacups.

Mme. de Dolmetsch, though obviously anxious to retain her hold on Mr.
Mayhew, did not restrict herself to such mild fare, but exercised her
matchless eyes on a troop of followers: the shock-haired pianist who
accompanied her recitations, a straight-backed young American
diplomatist whose collars seemed a part of his career, a lustrous South
American millionaire, and a short squat Sicilian who designed the
costumes for the pianist’s unproduced ballets.

All these people appeared to believe intensely in each other’s reality
and importance; but it gradually came over Campton that all of them,
excepting their host and hostess, knew that they were merely
masquerading.

To Campton, used to the hard-working world of art, this playing at
Bohemia seemed a nursery-game; but the scene acquired an unexpected
solidity from the appearance in it, one day, of the banker Jorgenstein,
who strolled in as naturally as if he had been dropping into Campton’s
studio to enquire into the progress of his own portrait.

“I must come and look you up, Campton?get you to finish me,” he said
jovially, tapping his fat boot with a malacca stick as he looked over
the painter’s head at the canvas on which Mrs. Talkett’s restless image
seemed to flutter like a butterfly impaled.

“You’ll owe it to _me_ if he does you,” the sitter declared, smiling
back at the leer which Campton divined behind his shoulder; and he felt
a sudden pity for her innocence.

“My wife made Campton come back to his real work?doing his bit, you
know,” said Mr. Talkett, straightening a curtain and disappearing again,
like a diving animal; and Mrs. Talkett turned her plaintive eyes on
Campton. “That kind of idiocy is all I’ve ever had,” they seemed to say;
and he nearly cried back to her: “But, you poor child, it’s the only
honest thing anywhere near you!”

Absorbed in his picture, he hardly stopped to wonder at Jorgenstein’s
reappearance, at his air of bloated satisfaction or his easy allusions
to Cabinet Ministers and eminent statesmen. The atmosphere of the
Talkett house was so mirage-like that even the big red bulk of the
international financier became imponderable in it.

But one day Campton, on his way home, ran across Dastrey, and remembered
that they had not met for weeks. The ministerial drudge looked worn and
preoccupied, and Campton was abruptly recalled to the world he had been
trying to escape from.

“You seem rather knocked-up?what’s wrong with you?”

Dastrey stared. “Wrong with me? Well?did you like the communique this
morning?”

“I didn’t read it,” said Campton curtly. They walked along a few steps
in silence.

“You see,” the painter continued, “I’ve gone back to my job?my painting.
I suddenly found I had to.”

Dastrey glanced at him with surprising kindliness. “Ah, that’s good
news, my dear fellow!”

“You think so?” Campton half-sneered.

“Of course?why not? What are you painting? May I come and see?”

“Naturally.” Campton paused. “The fact is, I was bitten the other day
with a desire to depict that little will-o’-the-wisp of a Mrs. Talkett.
Come to her house any afternoon and I’ll show you the thing.”

“To her house?” Dastrey paused with a frown. “Then the picture’s
finished?”

“No?not by a long way. I’m doing it there?in her _milieu_, among her
crowd. It amuses me; they amuse me. When will you come?” He shot out the
sentences like challenges; and his friend took them up in the same tone.

“To Mrs. Talkett’s?to meet her crowd? Thanks?I’m too much tied down by
my job.”

“No; you’re not. You’re too disapproving,” said Campton quarrelsomely.
“You think we’re all a lot of shirks, of drones, of international
loafers?I don’t know what you call us. But I’m one of them, so whatever
name you give them I must answer to. Well, I’ll tell you what they are,
my dear fellow?and I’m not ashamed to be among them: they’re people
who’ve resolutely, unanimously, unshakeably decided, for a certain
number of hours each day, to forget the war, to ignore it, to live as if
it were not and never had been, so that??”

“So that?”

“So that beauty shall not perish from the earth!” Campton shouted,
bringing his stick down with a whack on the pavement.

Dastrey broke into a laugh. “_Allons donc!_ Decided to forget the war?
Why, bless your heart, they’ve never, not one of ’em, ever been able to
remember it for an hour together; no, not from the first day, except as
it interfered with their plans or cut down their amusements or increased
their fortunes. You’re the only one of them, my dear chap, (since you
class yourself among them) of whom what you’ve just said is true; and if
you can forget the war while you’re at your work, so much the better for
you and for us and for posterity; and I hope you’ll paint all Mrs.
Talkett’s crowd, one after another. Though I doubt if they’re as good
subjects now as when you caught them last July with the war-funk on.” He
held out his hand with a dry smile. “Goodbye. I’m off to meet my nephew,
who’s here on leave.”

He hastened away, leaving Campton in a crumbled world. Louis Dastrey on
leave? But that was because he was at the front, the real front, in the
trenches, had already had a slight wound and a fine citation.
Staff-officers, as George had wisely felt, were not asking for leave
just yet....

The thoughts excited by this encounter left Campton more than ever
resolved to drug himself with work and frivolity. It was none of his
business to pry into the consciences of the people about him, not even
into Jorgenstein’s?into which one would presumably have had to be let
down in a diver’s suit, with oxygen pumping at top pressure. If the
government tolerated Jorgenstein’s presence in France, probably on the
ground that he could be useful?so the banker himself let it be known?it
was silly of people like Adele Anthony and Dastrey to wince at the mere
mention of his name. There woke in Campton all the old spirit of aimless
random defiance?revolt for revolt’s sake?which had marked the first
period of his life after his separation from his wife. He had long since
come to regard it as a crude and juvenile phase?yet here he was reliving
it.

Though he knew of the intimacy between Mrs. Talkett and the Brants he
had no fear of meeting Julia: it was impossible to picture her neat head
battling with the blasts of that dishevelled drawing-room. But though
she did not appear there, he heard her more and more often alluded to,
in terms of startling familiarity, by Mrs. Talkett’s visitors. It was
clear that they all saw her, chiefly in her own house, that they thought
her, according to their respective vocabularies, “a perfect dear,” “_une
femme exquise_” or “_une bonne vieille_” (ah, poor Julia!); and that
their sudden enthusiasm for her was not uninspired by the fact that she
had got her marvellous _chef_ demobilised, and was giving little
“war-dinners” followed by a quiet turn at bridge.

Campton remembered Mme. de Tranlay’s rebuke to Mrs. Brant on the day
when he had last called in the Avenue Marigny; then he remembered also
that it was on that very day that he had returned to his painting.

“After all, she held out longer than I did?poor Julia!” he mused,
annoyed at the idea of her being the complacent victim of all the
voracities he saw about him, and yet reflecting that she was at last
living her life, as they called it at Mrs. Talkett’s. After all, the
fact that George was not at the front seemed to exonerate his
parents?unless, indeed, it did just the opposite.

One day, coming earlier than usual to Mrs. Talkett’s to put in a last
afternoon’s work on her portrait, Campton, to his surprise, found his
wife in front of it. Equally to his surprise he noticed that she was
dressed with a juvenility quite new to her; and for the first time he
thought she looked old-fashioned and also old. She met him with her
usual embarrassment.

“I didn’t know you came as early as this. Madge told me I might just run
in??” She waved her hand toward the portrait.

“I hope you like it,” he said, suddenly finding that he didn’t.

“It’s marvellous?marvellous.” She looked at him timidly. “It’s
extraordinary, how you’ve caught her rhythm, her _tempo_,” she ventured
in the jargon of the place. Campton, to hide a smile, turned away to get
his brushes. “I’m so glad,” she continued hastily, “that you’ve begun to
paint again. We all need to ... to....”

“Oh, not you and I, do we?” he rejoined with a scornful laugh.

She evidently caught the allusion, for she blushed all over her
uncovered neck, up through the faintly wrinkled cheeks to the roots of
her newly dyed hair; then he saw her eyes fill.

“What’s she crying for? Because George is _not_ in danger?” he wondered,
busying himself with his palette.

Mrs. Talkett hurried in with surprise and apologies; and one by one the
habitues followed, with cheery greetings for Mrs. Brant and a moment of
constraint as they noted Campton’s presence, and the relation between
the two was mutely passed about. Then the bridge-tables were brought,
Mr. Talkett began to straighten the cards nervously, and the guests
broke up into groups, forgetting everything but their own affairs. As
Campton turned back to his work he was aware of a last surprise in the
sight of Mrs. Brant serene and almost sparkling, waving her adieux to
the bridge-tables, and going out followed by Jorgenstein, with whom she
seemed on terms of playful friendliness. Of all strange war
promiscuities, Campton thought this the strangest.




                                  XXI


The next time Campton saw Mrs. Brant was in his own studio.

He was preparing, one morning, to leave the melancholy place, when the
bell rang and his _bonne_ let her in. Her dress was less frivolous than
at Mrs. Talkett’s, and she wore a densely patterned veil, like the
ladies in cinema plays when they visit their seducers or their
accomplices.

Through the veil she looked at him agitatedly, and said: “George is not
at Sainte Menehould.”

He stared.

“No. Anderson was there the day before yesterday.”

“Brant? At Sainte Menehould?” Campton felt the blood rush to his
temples. What! He, the boy’s father, had not so much as dared to ask for
the almost unattainable permission to go into the war-zone; and this
other man, who was nothing to George, absolutely nothing, who had no
right whatever to ask for leave to visit him, had somehow obtained the
priceless favour, and instead of passing it on, instead of offering at
least to share it with the boy’s father, had sneaked off secretly to
feast on the other’s lawful privilege!

“How the devil???” Campton burst out.

“Oh, he got a Red Cross mission; it was arranged very suddenly?through a
friend....”

“Yes?well?” Campton stammered, sitting down lest his legs should fail
him, and signing to her to take a chair.

“Well?he was not there!” she repeated excitedly. “It’s what we might
have known?since he’s changed his address.”

“Then he didn’t see him?” Campton interrupted, the ferocious joy of the
discovery crowding out his wrath and wonder.

“Anderson didn’t? No. He wasn’t there, I tell you!”

“The H.Q. has been moved?”

“No, it hasn’t. Anderson saw one of the officers. He said George had
been sent on a mission.”

“To another H.Q.?”

“That’s what they said. I don’t believe it.”

“What do you believe?”

“I don’t know. Anderson’s sure they told him the truth. The officer he
saw is a friend of George’s, and he said George was expected back that
very evening.”

Campton sat looking at her uncertainly. Did she dread, or did she rather
wish, to disbelieve the officer’s statement? Where did she hope or fear
that George had gone? And what were Campton’s own emotions? As confused,
no doubt, as hers?as undefinable. The insecurity of his feelings moved
him to a momentary compassion for hers, which were surely pitiable,
whatever else they were. Then a savage impulse swept away every other,
and he said: “Wherever George was, Brant’s visit will have done him no
good.”

She grew pale. “What do you mean?”

“I wonder it never occurred to you?or to your husband, since he’s so
solicitous,” Campton went on, prolonging her distress.

“Please tell me what you mean,” she pleaded with frightened eyes.

“Why, in God’s name, couldn’t you both let well enough alone? Didn’t you
guess why George never asked for leave?why I’ve always advised him not
to? Don’t you know that nothing is as likely to get a young fellow into
trouble as having his family force their way through to see him, use
influence, seem to ask favours? I dare say that’s how that fool of a
Dolmetsch woman got Isador killed. No one would have noticed where he
was if she hadn’t gone on so about him. They _had_ to send him to the
front finally. And now the chances are??”

“Oh, no, no, no?don’t say it!” She held her hands before her face as if
he had flung something flaming at her. “It was I who made Anderson go!”

“Well?Brant ought to have thought of that?_I_ did,” he pursued
sardonically.

Her answer disarmed him. “You’re his father.”

“I don’t mean,” he went on hastily, “that Brant’s not right: of course
there’s nothing to be afraid of. I can’t imagine why you thought there
was.”

She hung her head. “Sometimes when I hear the other women?other
mothers?I feel as if our turn must come too. Even at Sainte Menehould a
shell might hit the house. Anderson said the artillery fire seemed so
near.”

He made no answer, and she sat silent, without apparent thought of
leaving. Finally he said: “I was just going out??”

She stood up. “Oh, yes?that reminds me. I came to ask you to come with
me.”

“With you???”

“The motor’s waiting?you must.” She laid her hand on his arm. “To see
Olida, the new _clairvoyante_. Everybody goes to her?everybody who’s
anxious about anyone. Even the scientific people believe in her. She’s
told people the most extraordinary things?it seems she warned Daisy de
Dolmetsch.... Well, I’d _rather_ know!” she burst out passionately.

Campton smiled. “She’ll tell you that George is back at his desk.”

“Well, then?isn’t that worth it? Please don’t refuse me!”

He disengaged himself gently. “My poor Julia, go by all means if it will
reassure you.”

“Ah, but you’ve got to come too. You can’t say no: Madge Talkett tells
me that if _the two nearest_ go together Olida sees so much more
clearly?especially a father and mother,” she added hastily, as if
conscious of the inopportune “nearest.” After a moment she went on:
“Even Mme. de Tranlay’s been; Daisy de Dolmetsch met her on the stairs.
Olida told her that her youngest boy, from whom she’d had no news for
weeks, was all right, and coming home on leave. Mme. de Tranlay didn’t
know Daisy, except by sight, but she stopped her to tell her. Only
fancy?the last person she would have spoken to in ordinary times! But
she was so excited and happy! And two days afterward the boy turned up
safe and sound. You must come!” she insisted.

Campton was seized with a sudden deep compassion for all these women
groping for a ray of light in the blackness. It moved him to think of
Mme. de Tranlay’s proud figure climbing a _clairvoyante’s_ stairs.

“I’ll come if you want me to,” he said.

They drove to the Batignolles quarter. Mrs. Brant’s lips were twitching
under her veil, and as the motor stopped she said childishly: “I’ve
never been to this kind of place before.”

“I should hope not,” Campton rejoined. He himself, during the Russian
lady’s rule, had served an apprenticeship among the soothsayers, and
come away disgusted with the hours wasted in their company. He suddenly
remembered the Spanish girl in the little white house near the railway,
who had told his fortune in the hot afternoons with cards and
olive-stones, and had found, by irrefutable signs, that he and she would
“come together” again. “Well, it was better than this pseudo-scientific
humbug,” he mused, “because it was picturesque?and so was she?and she
believed in it.”

Mrs. Brant rang, and Campton followed her into a narrow hall. A
servant-woman showed them into a _salon_ which was as commonplace as a
doctor’s waiting-room. On the mantelpiece were vases of Pampas grass,
and a stuffed monkey swung from the electrolier. Evidently Mme. Olida
was superior to the class of fortune-tellers who prepare a special
stage-setting, and no astrologer’s robe or witch’s kitchen was to be
feared.

The maid led them across a plain dining-room into an inner room. The
shutters were partly closed, and the blinds down. A voluminous woman in
loose black rose from a sofa. Gold earrings gleamed under her oiled
black hair?and suddenly, through the billows of flesh, and behind the
large pale mask, Campton recognized the Spanish girl who used to read
his fortune in the house by the railway. Her eyes rested a moment on
Mrs. Brant; then they met his with the same heavy stare. But he noticed
that her hands, which were small and fat, trembled a little as she
pointed to two chairs.

“Sit down, please,” she said in a low rough voice, speaking in French.
The door opened again, and a young man with Levantine eyes and a showy
necktie looked in. She said sharply: “No,” and he disappeared. Campton
noticed that a large emerald flashed on his manicured hand. Mme. Olida
continued to look at her visitors.

Mrs. Brant wiped her dry lips and stammered: “We’re his parents?a son at
the front....”

Mme. Olida fell back in a trance-like attitude, let her lips droop over
her magnificent eyes, and rested her head against a soiled sofa-pillow.
Presently she held out both hands.

“You are his parents? Yes? Give me each a hand, please.” As her
cushioned palm touched Campton’s he thought he felt a tremor of
recognition, and saw, in the half-light, the tremor communicate itself
to her lids. He grasped her hand firmly, and she lifted her eyes, looked
straight into his with her heavy velvety stare, and said: “You should
hold my hand more loosely; the currents must not be compressed.” She
turned her palm upward, so that his finger-tips rested on it as if on a
keyboard; he noticed that she did not do the same with the hand she had
placed in Mrs. Brant’s.

Suddenly he remembered that one sultry noon, lying under the olives, she
had taught him, by signals tapped on his own knee, how to say what he
chose to her without her brothers’ knowing it. He looked at the huge
woman, seeking the curve of the bowed upper lip on which what used to be
a faint blue shadow had now become a line as thick as her eyebrows, and
recalling how her laugh used to lift the lip above her little round
teeth while she threw back her head, showing the Agnus Dei in her neck.
Now her mouth was like a withered flower, and in a crease of her neck a
string of pearls was embedded.

“Take hands, please,” she commanded. Julia gave Campton her ungloved
hand, and he sat between the two women.

“You are the parents? You want news of your son?ah, like so many!” Mme.
Olida closed her eyes again.

“To know where he is?whereabouts?that is what we want,” Mrs. Brant
whispered.

Mme. Olida sat as if labouring with difficult visions. The noises of the
street came faintly through the closed windows and a smell of garlic and
cheap scent oppressed Campton’s lungs and awakened old associations.
With a final effort of memory he fixed his eyes on the _clairvoyante’s_
darkened mask, and tapped her palm once or twice. She neither stirred
nor looked at him.

“I see?I see??” she began in the consecrated phrase. “A veil?a thick
veil of smoke between me and a face which is young and fair, with a
short nose and reddish hair: thick, thick, thick hair, exactly like this
gentleman’s when he was young....”

Mrs. Brant’s hand trembled in Campton’s. “It’s true,” she whispered,
“before your hair turned grey it used to be as red as Georgie’s.”

“The veil grows denser?there are awful noises; there’s a face with
blood?but not that first face. This is a very young man, as innocent as
when he was born, with blue eyes like flax-flowers, but blood, blood ...
why do I see that face? Ah, now it is on a hospital pillow?not your
son’s face, the other; there is no one near, no one but some German
soldiers laughing and drinking; the lips move, the hands are stretched
out in agony; but no one notices. It is a face that has something to say
to the gentleman; not to you, Madame. The uniform is different?is it an
English uniform?... Ah, now the face turns grey; the eyes shut, there is
foam on the lips. Now it is gone?there’s another man’s head on the
pillow.... Now, now your son’s face comes back; but not near those
others. The smoke has cleared ... I see a desk and papers; your son is
writing....”

“Oh,” gasped Mrs. Brant.

“If you squeeze my hands you arrest the current,” Mme. Olida reminded
her. There was another interval; Campton felt his wife’s fingers beating
between his like trapped birds. The heat and darkness oppressed him;
beads of sweat came out on his forehead. Did the woman really see
things, and was that face with the blood on it Benny Upsher’s?

Mme. Olida droned on. “It is your son who is writing?the young man with
the very thick hair. He is writing to you?trying to explain something.
Perhaps you have hoped to see him lately? That is it; he is telling you
why it could not be. He is sitting quietly in a room. There is no
smoke.” She released Mrs. Brant’s hand and Campton’s. “Go home, Madame.
You are fortunate. Perhaps his letter will reach you to-morrow.”

Mrs. Brant stood up sobbing. She found her gold bag and pushed it toward
Campton. He had been feeling in his own pocket for money; but as he drew
it forth Mme. Olida put back his hand. “No. I am superstitious; it’s so
seldom that I can give good news. _Bonjour, madame, bonjour, monsieur._
I commend your son to the blessed Virgin and to all the saints and
angels.”

Campton put Julia into the motor. She was still crying, but her tears
were radiant. “Isn’t she wonderful? Didn’t you see how she seemed to
_recognize_ George? There’s no mistaking his hair! How could she have
known what it was like? Don’t think me foolish?I feel so comforted!”

“Of course; you’ll hear from him to-morrow,” Campton said. He was
touched by her maternal passion, and ashamed of having allowed her so
small a share in his jealous worship of his son. He walked away,
thinking of the young man dying in a German hospital, and of the other
man’s face succeeding his on the pillow.




                                  XXII


Two days later, to Campton’s surprise, Anderson Brant appeared in the
morning at the studio.

Campton, finishing a late breakfast in careless studio-garb, saw his
visitor peer cautiously about, as though fearing undressed models behind
the screens or empty beer-bottles under the tables. It was the first
time that Mr. Brant had entered the studio since his attempt to buy
George’s portrait, and Campton guessed at once that he had come again
about George.

He looked at the painter shyly, as if oppressed by the indiscretion of
intruding at that hour.

“It was my?Mrs. Brant who insisted?when she got this letter,” he brought
out between precautionary coughs.

Campton looked at him tolerantly: a barrier seemed to have fallen
between them since their brief exchange of words about Benny Upsher. The
letter, as Campton had expected, was a line from George to his mother,
written two days after Mr. Brant’s visit to Sainte Menehould. It
expressed, in George’s usual staccato style, his regret at having been
away. “Hard luck, when one is riveted to the same square yard of earth
for weeks on end, to have just happened to be somewhere else the day
Uncle Andy broke through.” It was always the same tone of fluent banter,
in which Campton fancied he detected a lurking stridency, like the
scrape of an overworked gramophone containing only comic disks.

“Ah, well?his mother must be satisfied,” Campton said as he gave the
letter back.

“Oh, completely. So much so that I’ve induced her to go off for a while
to Biarritz. The doctor finds her overdone; she’d got it into her head
that George had been sent to the front; I couldn’t convince her to the
contrary.”

Campton looked at him. “You yourself never believed it?”

Mr. Brant, who had half risen, as though feeling that his errand was
done, slid back into his seat and clasped his small hands on his
agate-headed stick.

“Oh, never.”

“It was not,” Campton pursued, “with that idea that you went to Sainte
Menehould?”

Mr. Brant glanced at him in surprise. “No. On the contrary??”

“On the contrary?”

“I understood from?from his mother that, in the circumstances, you were
opposed to his asking for leave; thought it unadvisable, that is. So, as
it was such a long time since we’d seen him??” The “we,” pulling him up
short, spread a brick-red blush over his baldness.

“Not longer than since I have?but then I’ve not your opportunities,”
Campton retorted, the sneer breaking out in spite of him. Though he had
grown kindly disposed toward Mr. Brant when they were apart, the old
resentments still broke out in his presence.

Mr. Brant clasped and unclasped the knob of his stick. “I took the first
chance that offered; I had his mother to think of.” Campton made no
answer, and he continued: “I was sorry to hear you thought I’d perhaps
been imprudent.”

“There’s no perhaps about it,” Campton retorted. “Since you say you were
not anxious about the boy I can’t imagine why you made the attempt.”

Mr. Brant was silent. He seemed overwhelmed by the other’s
disapprobation, and unable to find any argument in his own defence. “I
never dreamed it could cause any trouble,” he said at length.

“That’s the ground you’ve always taken in your interference with my
son!” Campton had risen, pushing back his chair, and Mr. Brant stood up
also. They faced each other without speaking.

“I’m sorry,” Mr. Brant began, “that you should take such a view. It
seemed to me natural ..., when Mr. Jorgenstein gave me the chance??”

“Jorgenstein! It was Jorgenstein who took you to the front? Took you to
see my son?” Campton threw his head back and laughed. “That’s
complete?that’s really complete!”

Mr. Brant reddened as if the laugh had been a blow. He stood very erect,
his lips as tightly closed as a shut penknife. He had the attitude of a
civilian under fire, considerably perturbed, but obliged to set the
example of fortitude.

Campton looked at him. At last he had Mr. Brant at a disadvantage. Their
respective situations were reversed, and he saw that the banker was
aware of it, and oppressed by the fear that he might have done harm to
George. He evidently wanted to say all this and did not know how.

His distress moved Campton, in whose ears the sound of his own outburst
still echoed unpleasantly. If only Mr. Brant would have kept out of his
way he would have found it so easy to be fair to him!

“I’m sorry,” he began in a quieter tone. “I dare say I’m unjust?perhaps
it’s in the nature of our relation. Can’t you understand how I’ve felt,
looking on helplessly all these years, while you’ve done for the boy
everything I wanted to do for him myself? Haven’t you guessed why I
jumped at my first success, and nursed my celebrity till I’d got half
the fools in Europe lining up to be painted?” His excitement was
mastering him again, and he went on hurriedly: “Do you suppose I’d have
wasted all these precious years over their stupid faces if I hadn’t
wanted to make my son independent of you? And he _would_ have been, if
the war hadn’t come; been my own son again and nobody else’s, leading
his own life, whatever he chose it to be, instead of having to waste his
youth in your bank, learning how to multiply your millions.”

The futility of this retrospect, and the inconsistency of his whole
attitude, exasperated Campton more than anything his visitor could do or
say, and he stopped, embarrassed by the sound of his own words, yet
seeing no escape save to bury them under more and more. But Mr. Brant
had opened his lips.

“They’ll be _his_, you know: the millions,” he said.

Campton’s anger dropped: he felt Mr. Brant at last too completely at his
mercy. He waited for a moment before speaking.

“You tried to buy his portrait once?you remember I told you it was not
for sale,” he then said.

Mr. Brant stood motionless, grasping his stick in one hand and stroking
his moustache with the other. For a while he seemed to be considering
Campton’s words without feeling their sting. “It was not the money ...”
he stammered out at length, from the depth of some unutterable plea for
understanding; then he added: “I wish you a good morning,” and walked
out with his little stiff steps.




                                 XXIII


Campton was thoroughly ashamed of what he had said to Mr. Brant, or
rather of his manner of saying it. If he could have put the same facts
quietly, ironically, without forfeiting his dignity, and with the added
emphasis which deliberateness and composure give, he would scarcely have
regretted the opportunity. He had always secretly accused himself of a
lack of courage in accepting Mr. Brant’s heavy benefactions for George
when the boy was too young to know what they might pledge him to; and it
had been a disappointment that George, on reaching the age of
discrimination, had not appeared to find the burden heavy, or the
obligations unpleasant.

Campton, having accepted Mr. Brant’s help, could hardly reproach his son
for feeling grateful for it, and had therefore thought it “more decent”
to postpone disparagement of their common benefactor till his own
efforts had set them both free. Even then, it would be impossible to pay
off the past?but the past might have been left to bury itself. Now his
own wrath had dug it up, and he had paid for the brief joy of casting
its bones in Mr. Brant’s face by a deep disgust at his own weakness.

All these things would have weighed on him even more if the outer weight
of events had not been so much heavier. He had not returned to Mrs.
Talkett’s since the banker’s visit; he did not wish to meet Jorgenstein,
and his talk with the banker, and his visit to the _clairvoyante_, had
somehow combined to send that whole factitious world tumbling about his
ears. It was absurd to attach any importance to poor Olida’s
vaticinations; but the vividness of her description of the baby-faced
boy dying in a German hospital haunted Campton’s nights. If it were not
the portrait of Benny Upsher it was at least that of hundreds and
thousands of lads like him, who were thus groping and agonizing and
stretching out vain hands, while in Mrs. Talkett’s drawing-room well-fed
men and expensive women heroically “forgot the war.” Campton, seeking to
expiate his own brief forgetfulness by a passion of renewed activity,
announced to Boylston the next afternoon that he was coming back to the
office.

Boylston hardly responded: he looked up from his desk with a face so
strange that Campton broke off to cry out: “What’s happened?”

The young man held out a newspaper. “They’ve done it?they’ve done it!”
he shouted. Across the page the name of the _Lusitania_ blazed out like
the writing on the wall.

The Berserker light on Boylston’s placid features transformed him into
an avenging cherub. “Ah, now we’re in it?we’re in it at last!” he
exulted, as if the horror of the catastrophe were already swallowed up
in its result. The two looked at each other without further words; but
the older man’s first thought had been for his son. Now, indeed, America
was “in it”: the gross tangible proof for which her government had
forced her to wait was there in all its unimagined horror. Cant and
cowardice in high places had drugged and stupefied her into the strange
belief that she was too proud to fight for others; and here she was
brutally forced to fight for herself. Campton waited with a straining
heart for his son’s first comment on the new fact that they were “in
it.”

But his excitement and Boylston’s exultation were short-lived. Before
many days it became apparent that the proud nation which had flamed up
overnight at the unproved outrage of the _Maine_ was lying supine under
the flagrant provocation of the _Lusitania_. The days which followed
were, to many Americans, the bitterest of the war: to Campton they
seemed the ironic justification of the phase of indifference and
self-absorption through which he had just passed. He could not go back
to Mrs. Talkett and her group; but neither could he take up his work
with even his former zeal. The bitter taste of the national humiliation
was perpetually on his lips: he went about like a man dishonoured.

He wondered, as the days and the weeks passed, at having no word from
George. Had he refrained from writing because he too felt the national
humiliation too deeply either to speak of it or to leave it unmentioned?
Or was he so sunk in security that he felt only a mean thankfulness that
nothing was changed? From such thoughts Campton’s soul recoiled; but
they lay close under the surface of his tenderness, and reared their
evil heads whenever they caught him alone.

As the summer dragged itself out he was more and more alone. Dastrey,
cured of his rheumatism, had left the Ministry to resume his ambulance
work. Miss Anthony was submerged under the ever-mounting tide of
refugees. Mrs. Brant had taken a small house at Deauville (on the
pretext of being near her hospital), and Campton heard of the Talketts’
being with her, and others of their set. Mr. Mayhew appeared at the
studio one day, in tennis flannels and a new straw hat, announcing that
he “needed rest,” and rather sheepishly adding that Mrs. Brant had
suggested his spending “a quiet fortnight” with her. “I’ve _got_ to do
it, if I’m to see this thing through,” Mr. Mayhew added in a stern
voice, as if commanding himself not to waver.

A few days later, glancing over the _Herald_, Campton read that Mme. de
Dolmetsch, “the celebrated _artiste_,” was staying with Mr. and Mrs.
Anderson Brant at Deauville, where she had gone to give recitations for
the wounded in hospital. Campton smiled, and then thought with a
tightening heart of Benny Upsher and Ladislas Isador, so incredibly
unlike in their lives, so strangely one in their death. Finally, not
long afterward, he read that the celebrated financier, Sir Cyril
Jorgenstein (recently knighted by the British Government) had bestowed a
gift of a hundred thousand francs upon Mrs. Brant’s hospital. It was
rumoured, the paragraph ended, that Sir Cyril would soon receive the
Legion of Honour for his magnificent liberalities to France.

And still the flood of war rolled on. Success here, failure there, the
menace of disaster elsewhere?Russia retreating to the San, Italy
declaring war on Austria and preparing to cross the Isonzo, the British
advance at Anzac, and from the near East news of the new landing at
Suvla. Through all this alternating of tragedy and triumph ran the
million and million individual threads of hope, fear, fortitude,
resolve, with which the fortune of the war was obscurely but fatally
interwoven. Campton remembered his sneer at Dastrey’s phrase: “One can
at least contribute an attitude.” He had begun to feel the force of
that, to understand the need of every human being’s “pulling his weight”
in the struggle, had begun to scan every face in the street in the
passionate effort to distinguish between the stones in the wall of
resistance and the cracks through which discouragement might filter.

The shabby office of the Palais Royal again became his only haven. His
portrait of Mrs. Talkett had brought him many new orders; but he refused
them all, and declined even to finish the pictures interrupted by the
war. One of his abrupt revulsions of feeling had flung him back, heart
and brain, into the horror he had tried to escape from. “If thou ascend
up into heaven I am there; if thou make thy bed in hell, behold I am
there,” the war said to him; and as the daily head-lines shrieked out
the names of new battle-fields, from the Arctic shore to the Pacific, he
groaned back like the Psalmist: “Whither shall I go from thee?”

The people about him?Miss Anthony, Boylston, Mlle. Davril, and all their
band of tired resolute workers?plodded ahead, their eyes on their task,
seeming to find in its fulfillment a partial escape from the intolerable
oppression. The women especially, with their gift of living in the
particular, appeared hardly aware of the appalling development of the
catastrophe; and Campton felt himself almost as lonely among these
people who thought of nothing but the war as among those who hardly
thought of it at all. It was only when he and Boylston, after a hard
morning’s work, went out to lunch together, that what he called the
_Lusitania look_, suddenly darkening the younger man’s face, moved the
painter with an anguish like his own.

Boylston, breaking through his habitual shyness, had one day
remonstrated with Campton for not going on with his painting: but the
latter had merely rejoined: “We’ve each of us got to worry through this
thing in our own way?” and the subject was not again raised between
them.

The intervals between George’s letters were growing longer. Campton, who
noted in his pocket-diary the dates of all that he received, as well as
those addressed to Mrs. Brant and Miss Anthony, had not had one to
record since the middle of June. And in that there was no allusion to
the _Lusitania_.

“It’s queer,” he said to Boylston, one day toward the end of July; “I
don’t know yet what George thinks about the _Lusitania_.”

“Oh, yes, you do, sir!” Boylston returned, laughing; “but all the mails
from the war-zone,” he added, “have been very much delayed lately. When
there’s a big attack on anywhere they hold up everything along the line.
And besides, no end of letters are lost.”

“I suppose so,” said Campton, pocketing the diary, and trying for the
millionth time to call up a vision of his boy, seated at a desk in some
still unvisualized place, his rumpled fair head bent above columns of
figures or files of correspondence, while day after day the roof above
him shook with the roar of the attacks which held up his letters.




                                BOOK III




                                  XXIV


The gates of Paris were behind them, and they were rushing through an
icy twilight between long lines of houses, factory chimneys and
city-girt fields, when Campton at last roused himself and understood.

It was he, John Campton, who sat in that car?that noiseless
swiftly-sliding car, so cushioned and commodious, so ingeniously fitted
for all the exigencies and emergencies of travel, that it might have
been a section of the Nouveau Luxe on wheels; and the figure next to
him, on the extreme other side of the deeply upholstered seat, was that
of Anderson Brant. This, for the moment, was as far as Campton’s dazed
perceptions carried him....

The motor was among real fields and orchards, and the icy half-light
which might just as well have been dusk was turning definitely to dawn,
when at last, disentangling his mind from a tight coil of passport and
permit problems, he thought: “But this is the road north of Paris?that
must have been St. Denis.”

Among all the multiplied strangenesses of the last strange hours it had
hardly struck him before that, now he was finally on his way to George,
it was not to the Argonne that he was going, but in the opposite
direction. The discovery held his floating mind for a moment, but for a
moment only, before it drifted away again, to be caught on some other
projecting strangeness.

Chief among these was Mr. Brant’s presence at his side, and the fact
that the motor they were sitting in was Mr. Brant’s. But Campton felt
that such enormities were not to be dealt with yet. He had neither slept
nor eaten since the morning before, and whenever he tried to grasp the
situation in its entirety his spirit fainted away again into outer
darkness....

His companion presently coughed, and said, in a voice even more than
usually colourless and expressionless: “We are at Luzarches already.”

It was the first time, Campton was sure, that Mr. Brant had spoken since
they had got into the car together, hours earlier as it seemed to him,
in the dark street before the studio in Montmartre; the first, at least,
except to ask, as the chauffeur touched the self-starter: “Will you have
the rug over you?”

The two travellers did not share a rug: a separate one, soft as fur and
light as down, lay neatly folded on the grey carpet before each seat;
but Campton, though the early air was biting, had left his where it lay,
and had not answered.

Now he was beginning to feel that he could not decently remain silent
any longer; and with an effort which seemed as mechanical and external
as the movements of the chauffeur whose back he viewed through the wide
single sheet of plate-glass, he brought out, like a far-off echo:
“Luzarches...?”

It was not that there lingered in him any of his old sense of antipathy
toward Mr. Brant. In the new world into which he had been abruptly
hurled, the previous morning, by the coming of that letter which looked
so exactly like any other letter?in this new world Mr. Brant was nothing
more than the possessor of the motor and of the “pull” that were to get
him, Campton, in the shortest possible time, to the spot of earth where
his son lay dying. Once assured of this, Campton had promptly and
indifferently acquiesced in Miss Anthony’s hurried suggestion that it
would be only decent to let Mr. Brant go to Doullens with him.

But the exchange of speech with any one, whether Mr. Brant or another,
was for the time being manifestly impossible. The effort, to Campton, to
rise out of his grief, was like that of a dying person struggling back
from regions too remote for his voice to reach the ears of the living.
He shrank into his corner, and tried once more to fix his attention on
the flying landscape.

All that he saw in it, speeding ahead of him even faster than their own
flight, was the ghostly vision of another motor, carrying a figure bowed
like his, mute like his: the figure of Fortin-Lescluze, as he had seen
it plunge away into the winter darkness after the physician’s son had
been killed. Campton remembered asking himself then, as he had asked
himself so often since: “How should I bear it if it happened to me?”

He knew the answer to that now, as he knew everything else a man could
know: so it had seemed to his astonished soul since the truth had
flashed at him out of that fatal letter. Ever since then he had been
turning about and about in a vast glare of initiation: of all the old
crowded misty world which the letter had emptied at a stroke, nothing
remained but a few memories of George’s boyhood, like a closet of toys
in a house knocked down by an earthquake.

The vision of Fortin-Lescluze’s motor vanished, and in its place Campton
suddenly saw Boylston’s screwed-up eyes staring out at him under furrows
of anguish. Campton remembered, the evening before, pushing the letter
over to him across the office table, and stammering: “Read it?read it to
me. I can’t??” and Boylston’s sudden sobbing explosion: “But I _knew_,
sir?I’ve known all along ...” and then the endless pause before Campton
gathered himself up to falter out (like a child deciphering the words in
a primer): “You _knew_?knew that George was wounded?”

“No, no, not that; but that he might be?oh, at any minute! Forgive
me?oh, do forgive me! He wouldn’t let me tell you that he was at the
front,” Boylston had faltered through his sobs.

“Let you tell me???”

“You and his mother: he refused a citation last March so that you
shouldn’t find out that he’d exchanged into an infantry regiment. He was
determined to from the first. He’s been fighting for months; he’s been
magnificent; he got away from the Argonne last February; but you were
none of you to know.”

“But why?why?why?” Campton had flashed out; then his heart stood still,
and he awaited the answer with lowered head.

“Well, you see, he was afraid: afraid you might prevent ... use your
influence ... you and Mrs. Brant....”

Campton looked up again, challenging the other. “He imagined perhaps
that we _had_?in the beginning?”

“Oh, yes”?Boylston was perfectly calm about it?“he knew all about that.
And he made us swear not to speak; Miss Anthony and me. Miss Anthony
knew.... If this thing happened,” Boylston ended in a stricken voice,
“you were not to be unfair to her, he said.”

Over and over again that short dialogue distilled itself syllable by
syllable, pang by pang, into Campton’s cowering soul. He had had to
learn all this, this overwhelming unbelievable truth about his son; and
at the same instant to learn that that son was grievously wounded,
perhaps dying (what else, in such circumstances, did the giving of the
Legion of Honour ever mean?); and to deal with it all in the wild
minutes of preparation for departure, of intercession with the
authorities, sittings at the photographer’s, and a crisscross of
confused telephone-calls from the Embassy, the Prefecture and the War
Office.

From this welter of images Miss Anthony’s face next detached itself:
white and withered, yet with a look which triumphed over its own ruin,
and over Campton’s wrath.

“Ah?you knew too, did you? You were his other confidant? How you all
kept it up?how you all lied to us!” Campton had burst out at her.

She took it firmly. “I showed you his letters.”

“Yes: the letters he wrote to you to be shown.”

She received this in silence, and he followed it up. “It was you who
drove him to the front?it was you who sent my son to his death!”

Without flinching, she gazed back at him. “Oh, John?it was you!”

“I?I? What do you mean? I never as much as lifted a finger??”

“No?” She gave him a wan smile. “Then it must have been the old man who
invented the Mangle!” she cried, and cast herself on Campton’s breast.
He held her there for a long moment, stroking her lank hair, and saying
“Adele?Adele,” because in that rush of understanding he could not think
of anything else to say. At length he stooped and laid on her lips the
strangest kiss he had ever given or taken; and it was then that, drawing
back, she exclaimed: “That’s for George, when you get to him. Remember!”

The image of George’s mother rose last on the whirling ground of
Campton’s thoughts: an uncertain image, blurred by distance, indistinct
as some wraith of Mme. Olida’s evoking.

Mrs. Brant was still at Biarritz; there had been no possibility of her
getting back in time to share the journey to the front. Even Mr. Brant’s
power in high places must have fallen short of such an attempt; and it
was not made. Boylston, despatched in haste to bear the news of George’s
wounding to the banker, had reported that the utmost Mr. Brant could do
was to write at once to his wife, and arrange for her return to Paris,
since telegrams to the frontier departments travelled more slowly than
letters, and in nine cases out of ten were delayed indefinitely. Campton
had asked no more at the time; but in the last moment before leaving
Paris he remembered having said to Adele Anthony: “You’ll be there when
Julia comes?” and Miss Anthony had nodded back: “At the station.”

The word, it appeared, roused the same memory in both of them; meeting
her eyes, he saw there the Gare de l’Est in the summer morning, the
noisily manœuvring trains jammed with bright young heads, the flowers,
the waving handkerchiefs, and everybody on the platform smiling fixedly
till some particular carriage-window slid out of sight. The scene, at
the time, had been a vast blur to Campton: would he ever again, he
wondered, see anything as clearly as he saw it now, in all its
unmerciful distinctness? He heard the sobs of the girl who had said such
a blithe goodbye to the young _Chasseur Alpin_, he saw her going away,
led by her elderly companion, and powdering her nose at the _laiterie_
over the cup of coffee she could not swallow. And this was what her sobs
had meant....

“This place,” said Mr. Brant, with his usual preliminary cough, “must
be??” He bent over a motor-map, trying to decipher the name; but after
fumbling for his eye-glasses, and rubbing them with a beautifully
monogrammed cambric handkerchief, he folded the map up again and slipped
it into one of the many pockets which honeycombed the interior of the
car. Campton recalled the deathlike neatness of the banker’s private
office on the day when the one spot of disorder in it had been the torn
telegram announcing Benny Upsher’s disappearance.

The motor lowered its speed to make way for a long train of army
lorries. Close upon them clattered a file of gun-wagons, with unshaven
soldiers bestriding the gaunt horses. Torpedo-cars carrying officers
slipped cleverly in and out of the tangle, and motor-cycles, incessantly
rushing by, peppered the air with their explosions.

“This is the sort of thing he’s been living in?living in for months and
months,” Campton mused.

He himself had seen something of the same kind when he had gone to
Chalons in the early days to appeal to Fortin-Lescluze; but at that time
the dread significance of the machinery of war had passed almost
unnoticed in his preoccupation about his boy. Now he realized that for a
year that machinery had been the setting of his boy’s life; for months
past such sights and sounds as these had formed the whole of George’s
world; and Campton’s eyes took in every detail with an agonized avidity.

“What’s that?” he exclaimed.

A huge continuous roar, seeming to fall from the low clouds above them,
silenced the puny rumble and clatter of the road. On and on it went, in
a slow pulsating rhythm, like the boom of waves driven by a gale on some
far-distant coast.

“That? The guns??” said Mr. Brant.

“At the front?”

“Oh, sometimes they seem much nearer. Depends on the wind.”

Campton sat bewildered. Had he ever before heard that sinister roar? At
Chalons? He could not be sure. But the sound had assuredly not been the
same; now it overwhelmed him like the crash of the sea over a drowning
head. He cowered back in his corner. Would it ever stop, he asked
himself? Or was it always like this, day and night, in the hell of hells
that they were bound for? Was that merciless thud forever in the ears of
the dying?

A sentinel stopped the motor and asked for their pass. He turned it
about and about, holding it upside-down in his horny hands, and
wrinkling his brows in the effort to decipher the inverted characters.

“How can I tell???” he grumbled doubtfully, looking from the faces of
the two travellers to their unrecognizable photographs.

Mr. Brant was already feeling for his pocket, and furtively extracting a
bank-note.

“For God’s sake?not that!” Campton cried, bringing his hand down on the
banker’s. Leaning over, he spoke to the sentinel. “My son’s dying at the
front. Can’t you see it when you look at me?”

The man looked, and slowly gave back the paper. “You can pass,” he said,
shouldering his rifle.

The motor shot on, and the two men drew back into their corners. Mr.
Brant fidgeted with his eye-glasses, and after an interval coughed
again. “I must thank you,” he began, “for?for saving me just now from an
inexcusable blunder. It was done mechanically ... one gets into the
habit....”

“Quite so,” said Campton drily. “But there are cases??”

“Of course?of course.”

Silence fell once more. Mr. Brant sat bolt upright, his profile detached
against the wintry fields. Campton, sunk into his corner, glanced now
and then at the neat grey silhouette, in which the perpendicular glint
of the eye-glass nearest him was the only point of light. He said to
himself that the man was no doubt suffering horribly; but he was not
conscious of any impulse of compassion. He and Mr. Brant were like two
strangers pinned down together in a railway-smash: the shared agony did
not bring them nearer. On the contrary, Campton, as the hours passed,
felt himself more and more exasperated by the mute anguish at his side.
What right had this man to be suffering as he himself was suffering,
what right to be here with him at all? It was simply in the exercise of
what the banker called his “habit”?the habit of paying, of buying
everything, people and privileges and possessions?that he had acquired
this ghastly claim to share in an agony which was not his.

“I shan’t even have my boy to myself on his deathbed,” the father
thought in desperation; and the mute presence at his side became once
more the symbol of his own failure.

The motor, with frequent halts, continued to crawl slowly on between
lorries, field-kitchens, artillery wagons, companies of haggard infantry
returning to their cantonments, and more and more vanloads of troops
pressing forward; it seemed to Campton that hours elapsed before Mr.
Brant again spoke.

“This must be Amiens,” he said, in a voice even lower than usual.

The father roused himself and looked out. They were passing through the
streets of a town swarming with troops?but he was still barely conscious
of what he looked at. He perceived that he had been half-asleep, and
dreaming of George as a little boy, when he used to have such bad colds.
Campton remembered in particular the day he had found the lad in bed, in
a scarlet sweater, in his luxurious overheated room, reading the first
edition of Lavengro. It was on that day that he and his son had first
really got to know each other; but what was it that had marked the date
to George? The fact that Mr. Brant, learning of his joy in the book, had
instantly presented it to him?with the price-label left inside the
cover.

“And it’ll be worth a lot more than that by the time you’re grown up,”
Mr. Brant had told his stepson; to which George was recorded to have
answered sturdily: “No, it won’t, if I find other stories I like
better.”

Miss Anthony had assisted at the conversation and reported it
triumphantly to Campton; but the painter, who had to save up to give his
boy even a simple present, could see in the incident only one more
attempt to rob him of his rights. “They won’t succeed, though, they
won’t succeed: they don’t know how to go about it, thank the Lord,” he
had said.

But they had succeeded after all; what better proof of it was there than
Mr. Brant’s tacit right to be sitting here beside him to-day; than the
fact that but for Mr. Brant it might have been impossible for Campton to
get to his boy’s side in time?

Oh, that pitiless incessant hammering of the guns! As the travellers
advanced the noise grew louder, fiercer, more unbroken; the
closely-fitted panes of the car rattled and danced like those of an old
omnibus. Sentinels stopped the chauffeur more frequently; Mr. Brant had
to produce the blue paper again and again. The day was wearing
on?Campton began again to be aware of a sick weariness, a growing
remoteness and confusion of mind. Through it he perceived that Mr.
Brant, diving into deeper recesses of upholstery, had brought out a
silver sandwich-box, a flask and glasses. As by magic they stood on a
shiny shelf which slid out of another recess, and Mr. Brant was
proffering the box. “It’s a long way yet; you’ll need all your
strength,” he said.

Campton, who had half turned from the invitation, seized a sandwich and
emptied one of the glasses. Mr. Brant was right; he must not let himself
float away into the void, seductive as its drowsy shimmer was.

His wits returned, and with them a more intolerable sense of reality. He
was all alive now. Every crash of the guns seemed to tear a piece of
flesh from his body; and it was always the piece nearest the heart. The
nurse’s few lines had said: “A shell wound: the right arm fractured,
fear for the lungs.” And one of these awful crashes had done it:
bursting in mystery from that innocent-looking sky, and rushing
inoffensively over hundreds of other young men till it reached its
destined prey, found George, and dug a red grave for him. Campton was
convinced now that his son was dead. It was not only that he had
received the Legion of Honour; it was the appalling all-destroying
thunder of the shells as they went on crashing and bursting. What could
they leave behind them but mismated fragments? Gathering up all his
strength in the effort not to recoil from the vision, Campton saw his
son’s beautiful body like a carcass tumbled out of a butcher’s cart....

                  *       *       *       *       *

“Doullens,” said Mr. Brant.

They were in a town, and the motor had turned into the court of a great
barrack-like building. Before them stood a line of empty stretchers such
as Campton had seen at Chalons. A young doctor in a cotton blouse was
lighting a cigarette and laughing with a nurse?laughing! At regular
intervals the cannonade shook the windows; it seemed the heart-beat of
the place. Campton noticed that many of the window-panes had been
broken, and patched with paper.

Inside they found another official, who called to another nurse as she
passed by laden with fresh towels. She disappeared into a room where
heaps of bloody linen were being stacked into baskets, returned, looked
at Campton and nodded. He looked back at her blunt tired features and
kindly eyes, and said to himself that they had perhaps been his son’s
last sight on earth.

The nurse smiled.

“It’s three flights up,” she said; “he’ll be glad.”

Glad! He was not dead, then; he could even be glad! In the staggering
rush of relief the father turned instinctively to Mr. Brant; he felt
that there was enough joy to be shared. But Mr. Brant, though he must
have heard what the nurse had said, was moving away; he did not seem to
understand.

“This way??” Campton called after him, pointing to the nurse, who was
already on the first step of the stairs.

Mr. Brant looked slightly puzzled; then, as the other’s meaning reached
him, he coloured a little, bent his head stiffly, and waved his stick
toward the door.

“Thanks,” he said, “I think I’ll take a stroll first ... stretch my
legs....” and Campton, with a rush of gratitude, understood that he was
to be left alone with his son.




                                  XXV


He followed his guide up the steep flights, which seemed to become
buoyant and lift him like waves. It was as if the muscle that always
dragged back his lame leg had suddenly regained its elasticity. He
floated up as one mounts stairs in a dream. A smell of disinfectants
hung in the cold air, and once, through a half-open door, a sickening
odour came: he remembered it at Chalons, and Fortin’s murmured:
“Gangrene?ah, if only we could get them sooner!”

How soon had they got _his_ boy, Campton wondered? The letter,
mercifully sent by hand to Paris, had reached him on the third day after
George’s arrival at the Doullens hospital; but he did not yet know how
long before that the shell-splinter had done its work. The nurse did not
know either. How could she remember? They had so many! The administrator
would look up the files and tell him. Only there was no time for that
now.

On a landing Campton heard a babble and scream: a nauseating scream in a
queer bleached voice that might have been man, woman or monkey’s.
Perhaps that was what the French meant by “a white voice”: this voice
which was as featureless as some of the poor men’s obliterated faces!
Campton shot an anguished look at his companion, and she understood and
shook her head. “Oh, no: that’s in the big ward. It’s the way they
scream after a dressing....”

She opened a door, and he was in a room with three beds in it, wooden
pallets hastily knocked together and spread with rough grey blankets. In
spite of the cold, flies still swarmed on the unwashed panes, and there
were big holes in the fly-net over the bed nearest the window. Under the
net lay a middle-aged bearded man, heavily bandaged about the chest and
left arm: he was snoring, his mouth open, his gaunt cheeks drawn in with
the fight for breath. Campton said to himself that if his own boy lived
he should like some day to do something for this poor devil who was his
roommate. Then he looked about him and saw that the two other beds were
empty.

He drew back.

The nurse was bending over the bearded man. “He’ll wake presently?I’ll
leave you”; and she slipped out. Campton looked again at the stranger;
then his glance travelled to the scarred brown hand on the sheet, a hand
with broken nails and blackened finger-tips. It was George’s hand, his
son’s, swollen, disfigured but unmistakable. The father knelt down and
laid his lips on it.

                  *       *       *       *       *

“What was the first thing you felt?” Adele Anthony asked him afterward:
and he answered: “Nothing.”

“Yes?at the very first, I know: it’s always like that. But the first
thing _after_ you began to feel anything?”

He considered, and then said slowly: “The difference.”

“The difference in _him_?”

“In him?in life?in everything.”

Miss Anthony, who understood as a rule, was evidently puzzled. “What
kind of a difference?”

“Oh, a complete difference.” With that she had to be content.

The sense of it had first come to Campton when the bearded man, raising
his lids, looked at him from far off with George’s eyes, and touched
him, very feebly, with George’s hand. It was in the moment of
identifying his son that he felt the son he had known to be lost to him
forever.

George’s lips were moving, and the father laid his ear to them; perhaps
these were last words that his boy was saying.

“Old Dad?in a motor?”

Campton nodded.

The fact seemed faintly to interest George, who continued to examine him
with those distant eyes.

“Uncle Andy’s?”

Campton nodded again.

“Mother???”

“She’s coming too?very soon.”

George’s lips were screwed into a whimsical smile. “I must have a shave
first,” he said, and drowsed off again, his hand in Campton’s....

                  *       *       *       *       *

“The other gentleman??” the nurse questioned the next morning.

Campton had spent the night in the hospital, stretched on the floor at
his son’s threshold. It was a breach of rules, but for once the major
had condoned it. As for Mr. Brant, Campton had forgotten all about him,
and at first did not know what the nurse meant. Then he woke with a
start to the consciousness of his fellow-traveller’s nearness. Mr.
Brant, the nurse explained, had come to the hospital early, and had been
waiting below for the last two hours. Campton, almost as gaunt and
unshorn as his son, pulled himself to his feet and went down. In the
hall the banker, very white, but smooth and trim as ever, was patiently
measuring the muddy flags.

“Less temperature this morning,” Campton called from the last flight.

“Oh,” stammered Mr. Brant, red and pale by turns.

Campton smiled haggardly and pulled himself together in an effort of
communicativeness. “Look here?he’s asked for you; you’d better go up.
Only for a few minutes, please; he’s awfully weak.”

Mr. Brant, speechless, stood stiffly waiting to be conducted. Campton
noticed the mist in his eyes, and took pity on him.

“I say?where’s the hotel? Just a step away? I’ll go around, then, and
get a shave and a wash while you’re with him,” the father said, with a
magnanimity which he somehow felt the powers might take account of in
their subsequent dealings with George. If the boy was to live Campton
could afford to be generous; and he had decided to assume that the boy
would live, and to order his behaviour accordingly.

“I?thank you,” said Mr. Brant, turning toward the stairs.

“Five minutes at the outside!” Campton cautioned him, and hurried out
into the morning air through which the guns still crashed methodically.

When he got back to the hospital, refreshed and decent, he was
surprised, and for a moment alarmed, to find that Mr. Brant had not come
down.

“Sending up his temperature, of course?damn him!” Campton raged,
scrambling up the stairs as fast as his stiff leg permitted. But outside
of George’s door he saw a small figure patiently mounting guard.

“I stayed with him less than five minutes; I was merely waiting to thank
you.”

“Oh, that’s all right.” Campton paused, and then made his supreme
effort. “How does he strike you?”

“Hopefully?hopefully. He had his joke as usual,” Mr. Brant said with a
twitching smile.

“Oh, _that_??! But his temperature’s decidedly lower. Of course they may
have to take the ball out of the lung; but perhaps before they do it he
can be moved from this hell.”

The two men were silent, the same passion of anxiety consuming them, and
no means left of communicating it to each other.

“I’ll look in again later. Shall I have something to eat sent round to
you from the hotel?” Mr. Brant suggested.

“Oh, thanks?if you would.”

Campton put out his hand and crushed Mr. Brant’s dry fingers. But for
this man he might not have got to his son in time; and this man had not
once made use of the fact to press his own claim on George. With pity in
his heart, the father, privileged to remain at his son’s bedside,
watched Mr. Brant’s small figure retreating alone. How ghastly to sit
all day in that squalid hotel, his eyes on his watch, with nothing to do
but to wonder and wonder about the temperature of another man’s son!

                  *       *       *       *       *

The next day was worse; so much worse that everything disappeared from
Campton’s view but the present agony of watching, hovering, hanging
helplessly on the words of nurse and doctor, and spying on the glances
they exchanged behind his back.

There could be no thought yet of extracting the bullet; a great surgeon,
passing through the wards on a hasty tour of inspection, had confirmed
this verdict. Oh, to have kept the surgeon there?to have had him at hand
to watch for the propitious moment and seize it without an instant’s
delay! Suddenly the vision which to Campton had been among the most
hideous of all his crowding nightmares?that of George stretched naked on
an operating-table, his face hidden by a chloroform mask, and an orderly
hurrying away with a pile of red towels like those perpetually carried
through the passages below?this vision became to the father’s fevered
mind as soothing as a glimpse of Paradise. If only George’s temperature
would go down?if only the doctors would pronounce him strong enough to
have the bullet taken out! What would anything else matter then? Campton
would feel as safe as he used to years ago, when after the recurring
months of separation the boy came back from school, and he could take
him in his arms and make sure that he was the same Georgie, only bigger,
browner, with thicker curlier hair, and tougher muscles under his
jacket.

What if the great surgeon, on his way back from the front, were to pass
through the town again that evening, reverse his verdict, and perhaps
even perform the operation then and there? Was there no way of
prevailing on him to stop and take another look at George on the return?
The idea took immediate possession of Campton, crowding out his
intolerable anguish, and bringing such relief that for a few seconds he
felt as if some life-saving operation had been performed on himself. As
he stood watching the great man’s retreat, followed by doctors and
nurses, Mr. Brant suddenly touched his arm, and the eyes of the two met.
Campton understood and gasped out: “Yes, yes; we must manage to get him
back.”

Mr. Brant nodded. “At all costs.” He paused, again interrogated
Campton’s eyes, and stammered: “You authorize???”

“Oh, God?anything!”

“He’s dined at my house in Paris,” Mr. Brant threw in, as if trying to
justify himself.

“Oh, go?_go_!” Campton almost pushed him down the stairs. Ten minutes
later he reappeared, modest but exultant.

“Well?”

“He wouldn’t commit himself, before the others??”

“Oh??”

“But to me, as he was getting into the motor??”

“Well?”

“Yes: if possible. Somewhere about midnight.”

Campton turned away, choking, and stumped off toward the tall window at
the end of the passage. Below him lay the court. A line of stretchers
was being carried across it, not empty this time, but each one with a
bloody burden. Doctors, nurses, orderlies hurried to and fro. Drub,
drub, drub, went the guns, shaking the windows, rolling their fierce din
along the cloudy sky, down the corridors of the hospital and the
pavement of the streets, like huge bowls crashing through story above
story of a kind of sky-scraping bowling alley.

“Even the dead underground must hear them!” Campton muttered.

The word made him shudder superstitiously, and he crept back to George’s
door and opened it; but the nurse, within, shook her head.

“He must sleep after the examination. Better go.”

Campton turned and saw Mr. Brant waiting. A bell rang twelve. The two,
in silence, walked down the stairs, crossed the court (averting their
eyes from the stretchers) and went to the hotel to get something to eat.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Midnight came. It passed. No one in the hurried confused world of the
hospital had heard of the possibility of the surgeon’s returning. When
Campton mentioned it to the nurse she smiled her tired smile, and said:
“He could have done nothing.”

Done nothing! How could she know? How could any one, but the surgeon
himself? Would he have promised if he had not thought there was some
chance? Campton, stretched out on a blanket and his rolled-up coat, lay
through the long restless hours staring at the moonlit sky framed by the
window of the corridor. Great clouds swept over that cold indifferent
vault: they seemed like the smoke from the guns which had not once
ceased through the night. At last he got up, turned his back on the
window, and lay down again facing the stairs. The moonlight unrolled a
white strip along the stone floor. A church-bell rang one ... two ...
there were noises and movements below. Campton raised himself, his heart
beating all over his body. Steps came echoing up.

“Careful!” some one called. A stretcher rounded the stair-rail; another,
and then another. An orderly with a lantern preceded them, followed by
one of the doctors, an old bunched-up man in a muddy uniform, who
stopped furtively to take a pinch of snuff. Campton could not believe
his eyes; didn’t the hospital people know that every bed on that floor
was full? Every bed, that is, but the two in George’s room; and the
nurse had given Campton the hope, the promise almost, that as long as
his boy was so ill she would keep those empty. “I’ll manage somehow,”
she had said.

For a mad moment Campton was on the point of throwing himself in the way
of the tragic procession, barring the threshold with his arms. “What
does this mean?” he stammered to the nurse, who had appeared from
another room with her little lamp.

She gave a shrug. “More casualties?every hospital is like this.”

He stood aside, wrathful, impotent. At least if Brant had been there,
perhaps by some offer of money?but how, to whom? Of what earthly use,
after all, was Brant’s boasted “influence”? These people would only
laugh at him?perhaps put them both out of the hospital!

He turned despairingly to the nurse. “You might as well have left him in
the trenches.”

“Don’t say that, sir,” she answered; and the echo of his own words
horrified him like a sacrilege.

Two of the stretchers were carried into George’s room. Campton caught a
glimpse of George, muttering and tossing; the moonlight lay in the
hollows of his bearded face, and again the father had the sense of utter
alienation from that dark delirious man who for brief intervals suddenly
became his son, and then as suddenly wandered off into strangeness.

The nurse slipped out of the room and signed to him.

“Both nearly gone ... they won’t trouble him long,” she whispered.

The man on the third stretcher was taken to a room at the other end of
the corridor. Campton watched him being lifted in. He was to lie on the
floor, then? For in that room there was certainly no vacancy. But
presently he had the answer. The bearers did not come out empty-handed;
they carried another man whom they laid on the empty stretcher. Lucky,
lucky devil; going, no doubt, to a hospital at the rear! As the
procession reached the stairs the lantern swung above the lucky devil’s
face: his eyes stared ceilingward from black orbits. One arm, swinging
loose, dangled down, the hand stealthily counting the steps as he
descended?and no one troubled, for he was dead.

At dawn Campton, who must have been asleep, started up, again hearing
steps. The surgeon? Oh, if this time it were the surgeon! But only Mr.
Brant detached himself from the shadows accumulated in the long
corridor: Mr. Brant, crumpled and unshorn, with blood-shot eyes, and
gloves on his unconscious hands.

Campton glared at him resentfully.

“Well?how about your surgeon? I don’t see him!” he exclaimed.

Mr. Brant shook his head despondently. “No?I’ve been waiting all night
in the court. I thought if he came back I should be the first to catch
him. But he has just sent his orderly for instruments; he’s not coming.
There’s been terrible fighting??”

Campton saw two tears running down Mr. Brant’s face: they did not move
him.

The banker glanced toward George’s door, full of the question he dared
not put.

Campton answered it. “You want to know how he is? Well, how should he
be, with that bullet in him, and the fever eating him inch by inch, and
two more wounded men in his room? _That’s_ how he is!” Campton almost
shouted.

Mr. Brant was trembling all over.

“Two more men?in his room?” he echoed shrilly.

“Yes?bad cases; dying.” Campton drew a deep breath. “You see there are
times when your money and your influence and your knowing everybody are
no more use than so much sawdust??”

The nurse opened the door and looked out. “You’re talking too loudly,”
she said.

She shut the door, and the two men stood silent, abashed; finally Mr.
Brant turned away. “I’ll go and try again. There must be other surgeons
... other ways ...” he whispered.

“Oh, your surgeons ... oh, your ways!” Campton sneered after him, in the
same whisper.




                                  XXVI


From the room where he sat at the foot of George’s glossy white bed,
Campton, through the open door, could watch the November sun slanting
down a white ward where, in the lane between other white beds, pots of
chrysanthemums stood on white-covered tables.

Through the window his eyes rested incredulously on a court enclosed in
monastic arches of grey stone, with squares of turf bordered by box
hedges, and a fountain playing. Beyond the court sloped the faded
foliage of a park not yet entirely stripped by Channel gales; and on
days without wind, instead of the boom of the guns, the roar of the sea
came faintly over intervening heights and hollows.

Campton’s ears were even more incredulous than his eyes. He was
gradually coming to believe in George’s white room, the ward beyond, the
flowers between the beds, the fountain in the court; but the sound of
the sea still came to him, intolerably but unescapably, as the crash of
guns. When the impression was too overwhelming he would turn away from
the window and cast his glance on the bed; but only to find that the
smooth young face on the pillow had suddenly changed into that of the
haggard bearded stranger on the wooden pallet at Doullens. And Campton
would have to get up, lean over, and catch the twinkle in George’s eyes
before the evil spell was broken.

Few words passed between them. George, after all these days, was still
too weak for much talk; and silence had always been Campton’s escape
from feeling. He never had the need to speak in times of inward stress,
unless it were to vent his anger?as in that hateful scene at Doullens
between himself and Mr. Brant. But he was sure that George always knew
what was passing through his mind; that when the sea boomed their
thoughts flew back together to that other scene, but a few miles and a
few days distant, yet already as far off, as much an affair they were
both rid of, as a nightmare to a wakened sleeper; and that for a moment
the same vision clutched them both, mocking their attempts at
indifference.

Not that the sound, to Campton at any rate, suggested any abstract
conception of war. Looking back afterward at this phase of his life he
perceived that at no time had he thought so little of the war. The noise
of the sea was to him simply the voice of the engine which had so nearly
destroyed his son: that association, deeply embedded in his half-dazed
consciousness, left no room for others.

The general impression of unreality was enhanced by his not having yet
been able to learn the details of George’s wounding. After a week during
which the boy had hung near death, the great surgeon?returning to
Doullens just as Campton had finally ceased to hope for him?had
announced that, though George’s state was still grave, he might be moved
to a hospital at the rear. So one day, miraculously, the perilous
transfer had been made, in one of Mrs. Brant’s own motor-ambulances; and
for a week now George had lain in his white bed, hung over by
white-gowned Sisters, in an atmosphere of sweetness and order which
almost made it seem as if he were a child recovering from illness in his
own nursery, or a red-haired baby sparring with dimpled fists at a new
world.

In truth, Campton found his son as hard to get at as a baby; he looked
at his father with eyes as void of experience, or at least of any means
of conveying it. Campton, at first, could only marvel and wait; and the
isolation in which the two were enclosed by George’s weakness, and by
his father’s inability to learn from others what the boy was not yet
able to tell him, gave a strange remoteness to everything but the things
which count in an infant’s world: food, warmth, sleep. Campton’s nearest
approach to reality was his daily scrutiny of the temperature-chart. He
studied it as he used to study the _communiques_ which he now no longer
even thought of.

Sometimes when George was asleep Campton would sit pondering on the days
at Doullens. There was an exquisite joy in silently building up, on that
foundation of darkness and anguish, the walls of peace that now
surrounded him, a structure so transparent that one could peer through
it at the routed Furies, yet so impenetrable that he sat there in a kind
of god-like aloofness. For one thing he was especially thankful?and that
was the conclusion of his unseemly wrangle with Mr. Brant; thankful
that, almost at once, he had hurried after the banker, caught up with
him, and stammered out, clutching his hand: “I know?I know how you
feel.”

Mr. Brant’s reactions were never rapid, and the events of the preceding
days had called upon faculties that were almost atrophied. He had merely
looked at Campton in mute distress, returned his pressure, and silently
remounted the hospital stairs with him.

Campton hated himself for his ill-temper, but was glad, even at the
time, that no interested motive had prompted his apology. He should have
hated himself even more if he had asked the banker’s pardon because of
Mr. Brant’s “pull,” and the uses to which it might be put; or even if he
had associated his excuses with any past motives of gratitude, such as
the fact that but for Mr. Brant he might never have reached George’s
side. Instead of that, he simply felt that once more his senseless
violence had got the better of him, and he was sorry that he had behaved
like a brute to a man who loved George, and was suffering almost as much
as he was at the thought that George might die....

After that episode, and Campton’s apology, the relations of the two men
became so easy that each gradually came to take the other for granted;
and Mr. Brant, relieved of a perpetual hostile scrutiny, was free to
exercise his ingenuity in planning and managing. It was owing to
him?Campton no longer minded admitting it?that the famous surgeon had
hastened his return to Doullens, that George’s translation to the sweet
monastic building near the sea had been so rapidly effected, and that
the great man, appearing there soon afterward, had extracted the bullet
with his own hand. But for Mr. Brant’s persistence even the leave to
bring one of Mrs. Brant’s motor-ambulances to Doullens would never have
been given; and it might have been fatal to George to make the journey
in a slow and jolting military train. But for Mr. Brant, again, he would
have been sent to a crowded military hospital instead of being brought
to this white heaven of rest. “And all that just because I overtook him
in time to prevent his jumping into his motor and going back to Paris in
order to get out of my way!” Campton, at the thought, lowered his spirit
into new depths of contrition.

                  *       *       *       *       *

George, who had been asleep, opened his eyes and looked at his father.

“Where’s Uncle Andy?”

“Gone to Paris to get your mother.”

“Yes. Of course. He told me??”

George smiled, and withdrew once more into his secret world.

But Campton’s state of mind was less happy. As the time of Julia’s
arrival approached he began to ask himself with increasing apprehension
how she would fit into the situation. Mr. Brant _had_ fitted into
it?perfectly. Campton had actually begun to feel a secret dependence on
him, a fidgety uneasiness since he had left for Paris, sweet though it
was to be alone with George. But Julia?what might she not do and say to
unsettle things, break the spell, agitate and unnerve them all? Campton
did not question her love for her son; but he was not sure what form it
would take in conditions to which she was so unsuited. How could she
ever penetrate into the mystery of peace which enclosed him and his boy?
And if she felt them thus mysteriously shut off would she not dimly
resent her exclusion? If only Adele Anthony had been coming too! Campton
had urged Mr. Brant to bring her; but the banker had failed to obtain a
permit for any one but the boy’s mother. He had even found it difficult
to get his own leave renewed; it was only after a first trip to Paris,
and repeated efforts at the War Office, that he had been allowed to go
to Paris and fetch his wife, who was just arriving from Biarritz.

Well?for the moment, at any rate, Campton had the boy to himself. As he
sat there, trying to picture the gradual resurrection of George’s
pre-war face out of the delicately pencilled white mask on the pillow,
he noted the curious change of planes produced by suffering and
emaciation, and the altered relation of lights and shadows. Materially
speaking, the new George looked like the old one seen in the bowl of a
spoon, and through blue spectacles: peaked, narrow, livid, with
elongated nose and sunken eye-sockets. But these altered proportions
were not what had really changed him. There was something in the curve
of the mouth that fever and emaciation could not account for. In that
new line, and in the look of his eyes?the look travelling slowly outward
through a long blue tunnel, like some mysterious creature rising from
the depths of the sea?that was where the new George lurked, the George
to be watched and lain in wait for, patiently and slowly puzzled out....

He reopened his eyes.

“Adele too?”

Campton had learned to bridge over the spaces between the questions.
“No; not this time. We tried, but it couldn’t be managed. A little
later, I hope??”

“She’s all right?”

“Rather! Blooming.”

“And Boylston?”

“Blooming too.”

George’s lids closed contentedly, like doors shutting him away from the
world.

It was the first time since his operation that he had asked about any of
his friends, or had appeared to think they might come to see him. But
his mind, like his stomach, could receive very little nutriment at a
time; he liked to have one mouthful given to him, and then to lie
ruminating it in the lengthening intervals between his attacks of pain.

Each time he asked for news of any one his father wondered what name
would next come to his lips. Even during his delirium he had mentioned
no one but his parents, Mr. Brant, Adele Anthony and Boylston; yet it
was not possible, Campton thought, that these formed the circumference
of his life, that some contracted fold of memory did not hold a nearer
image, a more secret name.... The father’s heart beat faster, half from
curiosity, half from a kind of shy delicacy, at the thought that at any
moment that name might wake in George and utter itself.

Campton’s thoughts again turned to his wife. With Julia there was never
any knowing. Ten to one she would send the boy’s temperature up. He was
thankful that, owing to the difficulty of getting the news to her, and
then of bringing her back from a frontier department, so many days had
had to elapse.

But when she arrived, nothing, after all, happened as he had expected.
She had put on her nurse’s dress for the journey (he thought it rather
theatrical of her, till he remembered how much easier it was to get
about in any sort of uniform); but there was not a trace of coquetry in
her appearance. As a frame for her haggard unpowdered face the white
coif looked harsh and unbecoming; she reminded him, as she got out of
the motor, of some mortified Jansenist nun from one of Philippe de
Champaigne’s canvases.

Campton led her to George’s door, but left her there; she did not appear
to notice whether or not he was following her. He whispered: “Careful
about his temperature; he’s very weak,” and she bent her profile
silently as she went in.




                                 XXVII


George, that evening, seemed rather better, and his temperature had not
gone up: Campton had to repress a movement of jealousy at Julia’s having
done her son no harm. Her experience as a nurse, disciplining a vague
gift for the sickroom, had developed in her the faculty of self-command:
before the war, if George had met with a dangerous accident, she would
have been more encumbering than helpful.

Campton had to admit the change, but it did not draw them any nearer.
Her manner of loving their son was too different. Nowadays, when he and
Anderson Brant were together, he felt that they were thinking of the
same things in the same way; but Julia’s face, even aged and humanized
by grief, was still a mere mask to him. He could never tell what form
her thoughts about George might be taking.

Mr. Brant, on his wife’s arrival, had judged it discreet to efface
himself. Campton hunted for him in vain in the park, and under the
cloister; he remained invisible till they met at the early dinner which
they shared with the staff. But the meal did not last long, and when it
was over, and nurses and doctors scattered, Mr. Brant again slipped
away, leaving his wife and Campton alone.

Campton glanced after him, surprised. “Why does he go?”

Mrs. Brant pursed her lips, evidently as much surprised by his question
as he by her husband’s withdrawal.

“I suppose he’s going to bed?to be ready for his early start to-morrow.”

“A start?”

She stared. “He’s going back to Paris.”

Campton was genuinely astonished. “Is he? I’m sorry.”

“Oh??” She seemed unprepared for this. “After all, you must see?we can’t
very well ... all three of us ... especially with these nuns....”

“Oh, if it’s only _that_??”

She did not take this up, and one of their usual silences followed.
Campton was thinking that it was all nonsense about the nuns, and
meditating on the advisability of going in pursuit of Mr. Brant to tell
him so. He dreaded the prospect of a long succession of days alone
between George and George’s mother.

Mrs. Brant spoke again. “I was sorry to find that the Sisters have been
kept on here. Are they much with George?”

“The Sisters? I don’t know. The upper nurses are Red Cross, as you saw.
But of course the others are about a good deal. What’s wrong? They seem
to me perfect.”

She hesitated and coloured a little. “I don’t want them to find
out?about the Extreme Unction,” she finally said.

Campton repeated her words blankly. He began to think that anxiety and
fatigue had confused her mind.

She coloured more deeply. “Oh, I forgot?you don’t know. I couldn’t think
of anything but George at first ... and the whole thing is so painful to
me.... Where’s my bag?”

She groped for her reticule, found it in the folds of the cloak she had
kept about her shoulders, and fumbled in it with wrinkled jewelled
fingers.

“Anderson hasn’t spoken to you, then?spoken about Mrs. Talkett?” she
asked suddenly.

“About Mrs. Talkett? Why should he? What on earth has happened?”

“Oh, I wouldn’t see her myself ... I couldn’t ... so he had to. She had
to be thanked, of course ... but it seems to me so dreadful, so very
dreadful ... _our_ boy ... that woman....”

Campton did not press her further. He sat dumbfounded, trying to take in
what she was so obviously trying to communicate, and yet instinctively
resisting the approach of the revelation he foresaw.

“George?_Mrs. Talkett_?” He forced himself to couple the two names,
unnatural as their union seemed.

“I supposed you knew. Isn’t it dreadful? A woman old enough??” She drew
a letter from her bag.

He interrupted her. “Is that letter what you want to show me?”

“Yes. She insisted on Anderson’s keeping it?for you. She said it
belonged to us, I believe.... It seems there was a promise?made the
night before he was mobilised?that if anything happened he would get
word to her.... No thought of _us_!” She began to whimper.

Campton reached out for the letter. Mrs. Talkett?Madge Talkett and
George! That was where the boy had gone then, that last night when his
father, left alone at the Crillon, had been so hurt by his desertion!
That was the name which, in his hours of vigil in the little white room,
Campton had watched for on his son’s lips, the name which, one day,
sooner or later, he would have to hear them pronounce.... How little he
had thought, as he sat studying the mysterious beauty of George’s face,
what a commonplace secret it concealed!

The writing was not George’s, but that of an unlettered French soldier.
Campton, glancing at the signature, recalled it as that of his son’s
orderly, who had been slightly wounded in the same attack as George, and
sent for twenty-four hours to the same hospital at Doullens. He had been
at George’s side when he fell, and with the simple directness often
natural to his class in France he told the tale of his lieutenant’s
wounding, in circumstances which appeared to have given George great
glory in the eyes of his men. They thought the wound mortal; but the
orderly and a stretcher-bearer had managed to get the young man into the
shelter of a little wood. The stretcher-bearer, it turned out, was a
priest. He had at once applied the consecrated oil, and George, still
conscious, had received it “with a beautiful smile”; then the orderly,
thinking all was over, had hurried back to the fighting, and been
wounded. The next day he too had been carried to Doullens; and there,
after many enquiries, he had found his lieutenant in the same hospital,
alive, but too ill to see him.

He had contrived, however, to see the nurse, and had learned from her
that the doctors had not given up hope. With that he had to be content;
but before returning to his base he had hastened to fulfill his
lieutenant’s instructions (given “many months earlier”) by writing to
tell “his lady” that he was severely wounded, but still alive?“which is
a good deal in itself,” the orderly hopefully ended, “not to mention his
receiving the Legion of Honour.”

Campton laid the letter down. There was too much to be taken in all at
once; and, as usual in moments of deep disturbance, he wanted to be
alone, above all wanted to be away from Julia. But Julia held him with
insistent eyes.

“Do you want this?” he asked finally, pushing the letter toward her.

She recoiled. “Want it? A letter written to that woman? No! I should
have returned it at once?but Anderson wouldn’t let me.... Think of her
forcing herself upon me as she did?and making you paint her portrait! I
see it all now. Had you any idea this was going on?”

Campton shook his head, and perceived by her look of relief that what
she had resented above all was the thought of his being in a secret of
George’s from which she herself was excluded.

“Adele didn’t know either,” she said, with evident satisfaction. Campton
remembered that he had been struck by Miss Anthony’s look of sincerity
when he had asked her if she had any idea where George had spent his
last evening, and she had answered negatively. This recollection made
him understand Mrs. Brant’s feeling of relief.

“Perhaps, after all, it’s only a flirtation?a mere sentimental
friendship,” he hazarded.

“A flirtation?” Mrs. Brant’s Mater Dolorosa face suddenly sharpened to
worldly astuteness. “A sentimental friendship? Have you ever heard
George mention her name?or make any sort of allusion to such a
friendship?”

Campton considered. “No. I don’t remember his ever speaking of her.”

“Well, then??” Her eyes had the irritated look he had seen on the
far-off day when he had thrown Beausite’s dinner invitation into the
fire. Once more, they seemed to say, she had taken the measure of his
worldly wisdom.

George’s silence?his care not even to mention that the Talketts were so
much as known to him?certainly made it look as though the matter went
deep with him. Campton, recalling the tone of the Talkett drawing-room
and its familiars, had an even stronger recoil of indignation than
Julia’s; but he was silenced by a dread of tampering with his son’s
privacy, a sense of the sacredness of everything pertaining to that
still-mysterious figure in the white bed upstairs.

Mrs. Brant’s face had clouded again. “It’s all so dreadful?and this
Extreme Unction too! What is it exactly, do you know? A sort of baptism?
Will the Roman Church try to get hold of him on the strength of it?”

Campton remembered with a faint inward amusement that, in spite of her
foreign bringing-up, and all her continental affinities, Julia had
remained as implacably and incuriously Protestant as if all her life she
had heard the Scarlet Woman denounced from Presbyterian pulpits. At
another time it would have amused him to ponder on this one streak in
her of the ancestral iron; but now he wanted only to console her.

“Oh, no?it was just the accident of the priest’s being there. One of our
chaplains would have done the same kind of thing.”

She looked at him mistrustfully. “The same kind of thing? It’s never the
same with them! Whatever they do reaches ahead. I’ve seen such advantage
taken of the wounded when they were too weak to resist ... didn’t know
what they were saying or doing....” Her eyes filled with tears. “A
priest and a woman?I feel as if I’d lost my boy!”

The words went through Campton like a sword, and he sprang to his feet.
“Oh, for God’s sake be quiet?don’t say it! What does anything matter but
that he’s alive?”

“Of course, of course ... I didn’t mean.... But that he should think
only of _her_, and not of us ... that he should have deceived us ...
about everything ... everything....”

“Ah, don’t say that either! Don’t tempt Providence! If he deceived us,
as you call it, we’ve no one but ourselves to blame; you and I,
and?well, and Brant. Didn’t we all do our best to make him deceive
us?with our intriguing and our wire-pulling and our cowardice? How he
despised us for it?yes, thank God, how he despised us from the first! He
didn’t hide the truth from Boylston or Adele, because they were the only
two on a level with him. And _they_ knew why he’d deceived us; they
understood him, they abetted him from the first.” He stopped, checked by
Mrs. Brant’s pale bewildered face, and the eyes imploringly lifted, as
if to ward off unintelligible words.

“Ah, well, all this is no use,” he said; “we’ve got him safe, and it’s
more than we deserve.” He laid his hand on her shoulder. “Go to bed;
you’re dead-beat. Only don’t say things?things that might wake up the
Furies....”

He pocketed the letter and went out in search of Mr. Brant, followed by
her gaze of perplexity.

The latter was smoking a last cigar as he paced up and down the cloister
with upturned coat-collar. Silence lay on the carefully darkened
building, crouching low under an icy sea-fog; at intervals, through the
hush, the waves continued to mimic the booming of the guns.

Campton drew out the orderly’s letter. “I hear you’re leaving to-morrow
early, and I suppose I’d better give this back,” he said.

Mr. Brant had evidently expected him. “Oh, thanks. But Mrs. Talkett says
she has no right to it.”

“No right to it? That’s a queer thing to say.”

“So I thought. I suppose she meant, till you’d seen it. She was
dreadfully upset ... till she saw me she’d supposed he was dead.”

Campton shivered. “She sent this to your house?”

“Yes; the moment she got it. It was waiting there when my?when Julia
arrived.”

“And you went to thank her?”

“Yes.” Mr. Brant hesitated. “Julia disliked to keep the letter. And I
thought it only proper to take it back myself.”

“Certainly. And?what was your impression?”

Mr. Brant hesitated again. He had already, Campton felt, reached the
utmost limit of his power of communicativeness. It was against all his
habits to “commit himself.” Finally he said, in an unsteady voice: “It
was impossible not to feel sorry for her.”

“Did she say?er?anything special? Anything about herself and??”

“No; not a word. She was?well, all broken up, as they say.”

“Poor thing!” Campton murmured.

“Yes?oh, yes!” Mr. Brant held the letter, turning it thoughtfully about.
“It’s a great thing,” he began abruptly, as if the words were beyond his
control, “to have such a beautiful account of the affair. George
himself, of course, would never??”

“No, never.” Campton considered. “You must take it back to her,
naturally. But I should like to have a copy first.”

Mr. Brant put a hand in his pocket. “I supposed you would. And I took
the liberty of making two?oh, privately, of course. I hope you’ll find
my writing fairly legible.” He drew two folded sheets from his
note-case, and offered one to Campton.

“Oh, thank you.” The two men grasped hands through the fog.

Mr. Brant turned to continue his round, and Campton went up to the
whitewashed cell in which he was lodged. Screening his candle to keep
the least light from leaking through the shutters, he re-read the story
of George’s wounding, copied out in the cramped tremulous writing of a
man who never took pen in hand but to sign a daily batch of typed
letters. The “hand-made” copy of a letter by Mr. Brant represented
something like the pious toil expended by a monkish scribe on the page
of a missal; and Campton was moved by the little man’s devotion.

As for the letter, Campton had no sooner begun to re-read it than he
entirely forgot that it was a message of love, addressed at George’s
request to Mrs. Talkett, and saw in it only the record of his son’s
bravery. And for the first time he understood that from the moment of
George’s wounding until now he had never really thought of him in
relation to the war, never thought of his judgment on the war, of all
the unknown emotions, resolves and actions which had drawn him so many
months ago from his safe shelter in the Argonne.

These things Campton, unconsciously, had put out of his mind, or rather
had lost out of his mind, from the moment when he had heard of George’s
wounding. By-and-bye, he knew, the sense of them, and of the questions
they raised, would come back and possess him; but meanwhile, emptied of
all else, he brimmed with the mere fact of George’s bodily presence,
with the physical signs of him, his weakness, his temperature, the pain
in his arm, the oppression on his lung, all the daily insistent details
involved in coaxing him slowly back to life.

The father could bear no more; he put the letter away, as a man might
put away something of which his heart was too full to measure it.
Later?yes; now, all he knew was that his son was alive.

                  *       *       *       *       *

But the hour of Campton’s entering into glory came when, two or three
days later, George asked with a sudden smile: “When I exchanged
regiments I did what you’d always hoped I would, eh, Dad?”

It was the first allusion, on the part of either, to the mystery of
George’s transit from the Argonne to the front. At Doullens he had been
too weak to be questioned, and as he grew stronger, and entered upon the
successive stages of his convalescence, he gave the impression of having
travelled far beyond such matters, and of living his real life in some
inconceivable region from which, with that new smile of his, he
continued to look down unseeingly on his parents. “It’s exactly as if he
were dead,” the father thought. “And if he were, he might go on watching
us with just such a smile.”

And then, one morning as they were taking a few steps on a sunny
terrace, Campton had felt the pressure of the boy’s sound arm, and
caught the old George in his look.

“I ... good Lord ... at any rate I’m glad you felt sure of me,” Campton
could only stammer in reply.

George laughed. “Well?rather!”

There was a long silence full of sea-murmurs, too drowsy and indolent,
for once, to simulate the horror of the guns.

“I?I only wish you’d felt you could trust me about it from the first, as
you did Adele and Boylston,” the father continued.

“But, my dear fellow, I did feel it! I swear I did! Only, you see, there
was mother. I thought it all over, and decided it would be easier for
you both if I said nothing. And, after all, I’m glad now that I
didn’t?that is, if you really do understand.”

“Yes; I understand.”

“That’s jolly.” George’s eyes turned from his and rested with a joyful
gravity on the little round-faced Sister who hurried up to say that he’d
been out long enough. Campton often caught him fixing this look of
serene benevolence on the people who were gradually repeopling his
world, a look which seemed to say that they were new to him, yet dimly
familiar. He was like a traveller returning after incommunicable
adventures to the place where he had lived as a child; and, as happens
with such wanderers, the trivial and insignificant things, the things a
newcomer would not have noticed, seemed often to interest him most of
all.

He said nothing more about himself, but with the look of recovered
humanness which made him more lovable if less remotely beautiful, began
to question his father.

“Boylston wrote that you’d begun to paint again. I’m glad.”

“Oh, I only took it up for a while last spring.”

“Portraits?”

“A few. But I chucked it. I couldn’t stand the atmosphere.”

“What atmosphere?”

“Of people who could want to be painted at such a time. People who
wanted to ‘secure a Campton.’ Oh, and then the dealers?God!”

George seemed unimpressed. “After all, life’s got to go on.”

“Yes?that’s what they say! And the only result is to make me doubt if
_theirs_ has.”

His son laughed, and then threw off: “You did Mrs. Talkett?”

“Yes,” Campton snapped, off his guard.

“She’s a pretty creature,” said George; and at that moment his eyes,
resting again on the little nurse, who was waiting at his door with a
cup of cocoa, lit up with celestial gratitude.

“The _communique’s_ good to-day,” she cried; and he smiled at her
boyishly. The war was beginning to interest him again: Campton was sure
that every moment he could spare from that unimaginable region which his
blue eyes guarded like a sword was spent among his comrades at the
front.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As the day approached for the return to Paris, Campton began to
penetrate more deeply into the meaning of George’s remoteness. He
himself, he discovered, had been all unawares in a far country, a
country guarded by a winged sentry, as the old hymn had it: the region
of silent incessant communion with his son. Just they two: everything
else effaced; not discarded, destroyed, not disregarded even, but
blotted out by a soft silver haze, as the brown slopes and distances
were, on certain days, from the windows of the seaward-gazing hospital.

It was not that Campton had been unconscious of the presence of other
suffering about them. As George grew stronger, and took his first steps
in the wards, he and his father were inevitably brought into contact
with the life of the hospital. George had even found a few friends, and
two or three regimental comrades, among the officers perpetually coming
and going, or enduring the long weeks of agony which led up to the end.
But that was only toward the close of their sojourn, when George was
about to yield his place to others, and be taken to Paris for the
re-education of his shattered arm. And by that time the weeks of
solitary communion had left such an imprint on Campton that, once the
hospital was behind him, and no more than a phase of memory, it became
to him as one of its own sea-mists, in which he and his son might have
been peacefully shut away together from all the rest of the world.




                                 XXVIII


“Preparedness!” cried Boylston in an exultant crow.

His round brown face with its curly crest and peering half-blind eyes
beamed at Campton in the old way across the desk of the Palais Royal
office; and from the corner where she had sunk down on one of the
broken-springed divans, Adele Anthony echoed: “Preparedness!”

It was the first time that Campton had heard the word; but the sense of
it had been in the air ever since he and George had got back to Paris.
He remembered, on the very day of their arrival, noticing something
different in both Boylston and Miss Anthony; and the change had shown
itself in the same way: both seemed more vivid yet more remote. It had
struck Campton in the moment of first meeting them, in the Paris
hospital near the Bois de Boulogne?Fortin-Lescluze’s old Nursing-Home
transformed into a House of Re-education?to which George had been taken.
In the little cell crowded with flowers?almost too many flowers, his
father thought, for the patient’s aching head and tired eyes?Campton,
watching the entrance of the two visitors, the first to be admitted
after Julia and Mr. Brant, had instantly remarked the air they had of
sharing something so secret and important that their joy at seeing
George seemed only the overflow of another deeper joy.

Their look had just such a vividness as George’s own; as their glances
crossed, Campton saw the same light in the eyes of all three. And now, a
few weeks later, the clue to it came to him in Boylston’s new word.
_Preparedness!_ America, it appeared, had caught it up from east to
west, in that sudden incalculable way she had of flinging herself on a
new idea; from a little group of discerning spirits the contagion had
spread like a prairie fire, sweeping away all the other catchwords of
the hour, devouring them in one great blaze of wrath and enthusiasm.
America meant to be prepared! First had come the creation of the
training camp at Plattsburg, for which, after long delays and much
difficulty, permission had been wrung from a reluctant government; then,
as candidates flocked to it, as the whole young manhood of the Eastern
States rose to the call, other camps, rapidly planned, were springing up
at Fort Oglethorpe in Georgia, at Fort Sheridan in Illinois, at The
Presidio in California; for the idea was spreading through the West, and
the torch kindled beside the Atlantic seaboard already flashed its light
on the Pacific.

For hours at a time Campton heard Boylston talking about these training
camps with the young Americans who helped him in his work, or dropped in
to seek his counsel. More than ever, now, he was an authority and an
oracle to these stray youths who were expending their enthusiasm for
France in the humblest of philanthropic drudgery: students of the Beaux
Arts or the University, or young men of leisure discouraged by the
indifference of their country and the dilatoriness of their government,
and fired by the desire to take part in a struggle in which they had
instantly felt their own country to be involved in spite of geographical
distance.

None of these young men had heard Benny Upsher’s imperious call to be
“in it” from the first, no matter how or at what cost. They were of the
kind to wait for a lead?and now Boylston was giving it to them with his
passionate variations on the great theme of Preparedness. George,
meanwhile, lay there in his bed and smiled; and now and then Boylston
brought one or two of the more privileged candidates to see him. One day
Campton found young Louis Dastrey there, worn and haggard after a bad
wound, and preparing to leave for America as instructor in one of the
new camps. That seemed to bring the movement closer than ever, to bring
it into their very lives. The thought flashed through Campton: “When
George is up, we’ll get him sent out too”; and once again a delicious
sense of security crept through him.

George, as yet, was only sitting up for a few hours a day; the wound in
the lung was slow in healing, and his fractured arm in recovering its
flexibility. But in another fortnight he was to leave the hospital and
complete his convalescence at his mother’s.

The thought was bitter to Campton; he had had all kinds of wild plans?of
taking George to the Crillon, or hiring an apartment for him, or even
camping with him at the studio. But George had smiled all this away. He
meant to return to the Avenue Marigny, where he always stayed when he
came to Paris, and where it was natural that his mother should want him
now. Adele Anthony pointed out to Campton how natural it was, one day as
he and she left the Palais Royal together. They were going to lunch at a
near-by restaurant, as they often did on leaving the office, and Campton
had begun to speak of George’s future arrangements. He would be well
enough to leave the hospital in another week, and then no doubt a
staff-job could be obtained for him in Paris?“with Brant’s pull, you
know,” Campton concluded, hardly aware that he had uttered the detested
phrase without even a tinge of irony. But Adele was aware, as he saw by
the faint pucker of her thin lips.

He shrugged her smile away indifferently. “Oh, well?hang it, yes!
Everything’s changed now, isn’t it? After what the boy’s been through I
consider that we’re more than justified in using Brant’s pull in his
favour?or anybody else’s.”

Miss Anthony nodded and unfolded her napkin.

“Well, then,” Campton continued his argument, “as he’s likely to be in
Paris now till the war is over?which means some time next year, they all
say?why shouldn’t I take a jolly apartment somewhere for the two of us?
Those pictures I did last spring brought me in a lot of money, and
there’s no reason??” His face lit up. “Servants, you say? Why, my poor
Mariette may be back from Lille any time now. They tell me there’s sure
to be a big push in the spring. They’re saving up for that all along the
line. Ask Dastrey ... ask....”

“You’d better let George go to his mother,” said Miss Anthony concisely.

“Why?”

“Because it’s natural?it’s human. _You’re_ not always, you know,” she
added with another pucker.

“Not human?”

“I don’t mean that you’re inhuman. But you see things differently.”

“I don’t want to see anything but one; and that’s my own son. How shall
I ever see George if he’s at the Avenue Marigny?”

“He’ll come to you.”

“Yes?when he’s not at Mrs. Talkett’s!”

Miss Anthony frowned. The subject had been touched upon between them
soon after Campton’s return, but Miss Anthony had little light to throw
on it: George had been as mute with her as with every one else, and she
knew Mrs. Talkett but slightly, and seldom saw her. Yet Campton
perceived that she could not hear the young woman named without an
involuntary contraction of her brows.

“I wish I liked her!” she murmured.

“Mrs. Talkett?”

“Yes?I should think better of myself if I did. And it might be useful.
But I can’t?I can’t!”

Campton said within himself: “Oh, women??!”

For his own resentment had died out long ago. He could think of the
affair now as one of hundreds such as happen to young men; he was even
conscious of regarding it, in some unlit secret fold of himself, as a
probable guarantee of George’s wanting to remain in Paris, another
subterranean way of keeping him, should such be needed. Perhaps that was
what Miss Anthony meant by saying that her liking Mrs. Talkett might be
“useful.”

“Why shouldn’t he be with me?” the father persisted. “He and I were
going off together when the war begun. I was defrauded of that?why
shouldn’t I have him now?”

Miss Anthony smiled. “Well, for one thing, because of that very ‘pull’
you were speaking of.”

“Oh, the Brants, the Brants!” Campton glanced impatiently at the
bill-of-fare, grumbled: “_Dejeuner du jour_, I suppose?” and went on:
“Yes; I might have known it?he belongs to them. From the minute we got
back, and I saw them at the station, with their motor waiting, and
everything arranged as only money can arrange it, I knew I’d lost my boy
again.” He stared moodily before him. “And yet if the war hadn’t come I
should have got him back?I almost had.”

His companion still smiled, a little wistfully. She leaned over and laid
her hand on his, under cover of the bill-of-fare. “You did get him back,
John, forever and always, the day he exchanged into the infantry. Isn’t
that enough?”

Campton answered her smile. “You gallant old chap, you!” he said; and
they began to lunch.

                  *       *       *       *       *

George was able to be up now, able to drive out, and to see more people;
and Campton was not surprised, on approaching his door a day or two
later, to hear several voices in animated argument.

The voices (and this did surprise him) were all men’s. In one he
recognized Boylston’s deep round notes; but the answering voice, flat,
toneless and yet eager, puzzled him with a sense of something familiar
but forgotten. He opened the door, and saw, at the tea-tray between
George and Boylston, the smoothly-brushed figure of Roger Talkett.

Campton had not seen Mrs. Talkett’s husband for months, and in the
interval so much had happened that the young man, always somewhat
faintly-drawn, had become as dim as a daguerreotype held at the wrong
angle.

The painter hung back, slightly embarrassed; but Mr. Talkett did not
seem in the least disturbed by his appearance, or by the fact of himself
being where he was. It was evident that, on whatever terms George might
be with his wife, Mr. Talkett was determined to shed on him the same
impartial beam as on all her other visitors.

His eye-glasses glinted blandly up at Campton. “Now I daresay I _am_
subversive,” he began, going on with what he had been saying, but in a
tone intended to include the newcomer. “I don’t say I’m not. We _are_ a
subversive lot at home, all of us?you must have noticed that, haven’t
you, Mr. Campton?”

Boylston emitted a faint growl. “What’s that got to do with it?” he
asked.

Mr. Talkett’s glasses slanted in his direction. “Why?everything!
Resistance to the herd-instinct (to borrow one of my wife’s expressions)
is really innate in me. And the idea of giving in now, of sacrificing my
convictions, just because of all this deafening noise about America’s
danger and America’s duties?well, _no_,” said Mr. Talkett, straightening
his glasses, “Philistinism won’t go down with me, in whatever form it
tries to disguise itself.” Instinctively, he stretched a neat hand
toward the teacups, as if he had been rearranging the furniture at one
of his wife’s parties.

“But?but?but??” Boylston stuttered, red with rage.

George burst into a laugh. He seemed to take a boyish amusement in the
dispute. “Tea, father?” he suggested, reaching across the tray for a
cigarette.

Talkett jerked himself to his feet. “Take my chair, now do, Mr. Campton.
You’ll be more comfortable. Here, let me shake up this cushion for
you??” (“_Cushion!_” Boylston interjected scornfully.) “A light, George?
Now don’t move!?I don’t say, of course, old chap,” Talkett continued, as
he held the match deferentially to George’s cigarette, “that this sort
of talk would be safe?or advisable?just now in public; subversive talk
never is. But when two or three of the Elect are gathered together?well,
your father sees my point, I know. The Hero,” he nodded at George, “has
his job, and the Artist,” with a slant at Campton, “his. In Germany, for
instance, as we’re beginning to find out, the creative minds, the
Intelligentsia (to use another of my wife’s expressions), have been
carefully protected from the beginning, given jobs, vitally important
jobs of course, but where their lives were not exposed. The country
needs them too much in other ways; they would probably be wretched
fighters, and they’re of colossal service in their own line. Whereas in
France and England??” he suddenly seemed to see his chance??“Well, look
here, Mr. Campton, I appeal to you, I appeal to the great creative
Artist: in any country but France and England, would a fellow of
George’s brains have been _allowed_, even at this stage of the war, to
chuck an important staff job, requiring intellect, tact and _savoir
faire_, and try to get himself killed like any unbaked boy?like your
poor cousin Benny Upsher, for instance? Would he?”

“Yes?in America!” shouted Boylston; and Mr. Talkett’s tallowy cheeks
turned pink.

“George knows how I feel about these things,” he stammered.

George still laughed in his remote impartial way, and Boylston asked
with a grin: “Why don’t you get yourself naturalized?a neutral?”

Mr. Talkett’s pinkness deepened. “I have lived too much among Artists??”
he began; and George interrupted gaily: “There’s a lot to be said on
Talkett’s side too. Going, Roger? Well, I shall be able to look in on
you now in a few days. Remember me to Madge. Goodbye.”

Boylston rose also, and Campton remained alone with his son.

“Remember me to Madge!” That was the way in which the modern young man
spoke of his beloved to his beloved’s proprietor. There had not been a
shadow of constraint in George’s tone; and now, glancing at the door
which had closed on Mr. Talkett, he merely said, as if apostrophizing
the latter’s neat back: “Poor devil! He’s torn to pieces with it.”

“With what?” asked Campton, startled.

“Why, with Boylston’s Preparedness. Wanting to do the proper thing?and
never before having had to decide between anything more vital than
straight or turned-down collars. It’s playing the very deuce with him.”

His eyes grew thoughtful. Was he going to pronounce Mrs. Talkett’s
name?at last? But no; he wandered back to her husband. “Poor little ass!
Of course he’ll decide against.” He shrugged his shoulders. “And
Boylston’s just as badly torn in the other direction.”

“Boylston?”

“Yes. Knowing that he wouldn’t be taken himself, on account of his bad
heart and his blind eyes, and wondering if, in spite of his
disabilities, he’s got the right to preach to all these young chaps here
who hang on his words like the gospel. One of them taunted him with it
the other day.”

“The cur!”

“Yes. And ever since, of course, Boylston’s been twice as fierce, and
overworking himself to calm his frenzy. The men who can’t go are all
like that, when they know it’s their proper work. It isn’t everybody’s
billet out there?I’ve learnt that since I’ve had a look at it?but it
would be Boylston’s if he had the health, and he knows it, and that’s
what drives him wild.” George looked at his father with a smile. “You
don’t know how I thank my stars that there weren’t any ‘problems’ for
me, but just a plain job that picked me up by the collar, and dropped me
down where I belonged.” He reached for another cigarette. “Old Adele’s
coming presently. Do you suppose we could rake up some fresh tea?” he
asked.




                                  XXIX


Coming out of the unlit rainy March night, it was agreeable but almost
startling to Campton to enter Mrs. Talkett’s drawing-room. In the
softness of shaded lamplight, against curtains closely drawn, young
women dressed with extravagant elegance chatted with much-decorated
officers in the new “horizon” uniform, with here and there among them an
elderly civilian head, such as Harvey Mayhew’s silvery thatch and the
square rapacious skull of the newly-knighted patriot, Sir Cyril
Jorgenstein.

Campton had gone to Mrs. Talkett’s that afternoon because she had lent
her apartment to “The Friends of French Art,” who were giving a concert
organized by Miss Anthony and Mlle. Davril, with Mme. de Dolmetsch’s
pianist as their leading performer. It would have been ungracious to
deprive the indefatigable group of the lustre they fancied Campton’s
presence would confer; and he was not altogether sorry to be there. He
knew that George had promised Miss Anthony to come; and he wanted to see
his son with Mrs. Talkett.

An abyss seemed to divide this careless throng of people, so obviously
assembled for their own pleasure, the women to show their clothes, the
men to admire them, from the worn preoccupied audiences of the first
war-charity entertainments. The war still raged; wild hopes had given
way to dogged resignation; each day added to the sum of public anguish
and private woe. But the strain had been too long, the tragedy too
awful. The idle and the useless had reached their emotional limit, and
once more they dressed and painted, smiled, gossiped, flirted as though
the long agony were over.

On a sofa stacked with orange-velvet cushions Mme. de Dolmetsch reclined
in a sort of serpent-coil of flexible grey-green hung with strange
amulets. Her eyes, in which fabulous islands seemed to dream, were fixed
on the bushy-haired young man at the piano. Close by, upright and
tight-waisted, sat the Marquise de Tranlay, her mourning veil thrown
back from a helmetlike hat. She had planted herself in a Louis Philippe
armchair, as if appealing to its sturdy frame to protect her from the
anarchy of Mrs. Talkett’s furniture; and beside her was the daughter for
whose sake she had doubtless come?a frowning beauty who, in spite of her
dowdy dress and ugly boots, somehow declared herself as having already
broken away from the maternal tradition.

Mme. de Tranlay’s presence in that drawing-room was characteristic
enough. It meant?how often one heard it nowadays!?that mothers had to
take their daughters wherever there was a chance of their meeting young
men, and that such chances were found only in the few “foreign” houses
where, discreetly, almost clandestinely, entertaining had been resumed.
You had to take them there, Mme. de Tranlay’s look seemed to say,
because they had to be married (the sooner the better in these wild
times, with all the old barriers down), and because the young men were
growing so tragically few, and the competition was so fierce, and
because in such emergencies a French mother, whose first thought is
always for her children, must learn to accept, even to seek,
propinquities from which her inmost soul, and all the ancestral souls
within her, would normally recoil.

Campton remembered her gallant attitude on the day when, under her fresh
crape, she had rebuked Mrs. Brant’s despondency. “But how she hates it
here?how she must loathe sitting next to that woman!” he thought; and
just then he saw her turn toward Mme. de Dolmetsch with a stiff bend
from the waist, and heard her say in her most conciliatory tone: “Your
great friend, the rich American, _chere Madame_, the benefactor of
France?we should so like to thank him, Claire and I, for all he is doing
for our country.”

Beckoned to by Mme. de Dolmetsch, Mr. Mayhew, all pink and silver and
prominent pearl scarf-pin, bowed before the Tranlay ladies, while the
Marquise deeply murmured: “We are grateful?we shall not forget?” and
Mademoiselle de Tranlay, holding him with her rich gaze, added in fluent
English: “Mamma hopes you’ll come to tea on Sunday?with no one but my
uncle the Duc de Montlhery?so that we may thank you better than we can
here.”

“Great women?great women!” Campton mused. He was still watching Mme. de
Tranlay’s dauntless mask when her glance deserted the gratified Mayhew
to seize on a younger figure. It was that of George, who had just
entered. Mme. de Tranlay, with a quick turn, caught Campton’s eye,
greeted him with her trenchant cordiality, and asked, in a voice like
the pounce of talons: “The young officer who has the Legion of
Honour?the one you just nodded to?with reddish hair and his left arm in
a sling? French, I suppose, from his uniform; and yet??? Yes, talking to
Mrs. Talkett. Can you tell me???”

“My son,” said Campton with satisfaction.

The effect was instantaneous, though Mme. de Tranlay kept her radiant
steadiness. “How charming?charming?charming!” And, after a proper
interval: “But, Claire, my child, we’ve not yet spoken to Mrs. Brant,
whom I see over there.” And she steered her daughter swiftly toward
Julia.

Campton’s eyes returned to his son. George was still with Mrs. Talkett,
but they had only had time for a word or two before she was called away
to seat an important dowager. In that moment, however, the father noted
many things. George, as usual nowadays, kept his air of guarded
kindliness, though the blue of his eyes grew deeper; but Mrs. Talkett
seemed bathed in light. It was such a self-revelation that Campton’s
curiosity was lost in the artist’s abstract joy. “If I could have
painted her like that!” he thought, reminded of having caught Mme. de
Dolmetsch transfigured by fear for her lover; but an instant later he
remembered. “Poor little thing!” he murmured. Mrs. Talkett turned her
head, as if his thought had reached her. “Oh, yes?oh, yes; come and let
me tell you all about it,” her eyes entreated him. But Mayhew and Sir
Cyril Jorgenstein were between them.

“George!” Mrs. Brant called; and across the intervening groups Campton
saw his son bowing to the Marquise de Tranlay.

Mme. de Dolmetsch jumped up, her bracelets jangling like a prompter’s
call. “Silence!” she cried. The ladies squeezed into their seats, the
men resigned themselves to door-posts and window-embrasures, and the
pianist attacked Stravinsky....

“Dancing?” Campton heard his hostess answering some one. “N?no: not
_quite_ yet, I think. Though in London, already ... oh, just for the
officers on leave, of course. Poor darlings?why shouldn’t they? But
to-day, you see, it’s for a charity.” Her smile appealed to her hearer
to acknowledge the distinction.

The music was over, and scanning the groups at the tea-tables, Campton
saw Adele and Mlle. Davril squeezed away in the remotest corner of the
room. He took a chair at their table, and Boylston presently blinked his
way to them through the crowd.

They seemed, all four, more like unauthorized intruders on the brilliant
scene than its laborious organizers. The entertainment, escaping from
their control, had speedily reverted to its true purpose of feeding and
amusing a crowd of bored and restless people; and the little group
recognized the fact, and joked over it in their different ways. But
Mlle. Davril was happy at the sale of tickets, which must have been
immense to judge from the crowd (spying about the entrance, she had seen
furious fine ladies turn away ticketless); and Adele Anthony was
exhilarated by the nearness of people she did not know, or wish to know,
but with whose names and private histories she was minutely and
passionately familiar.

“That’s the old Duchesse de Murols with Mrs. Talkett?there, she’s put
her at the Beausite’s table! Well, of all places! Ah, but you’re all too
young to know about Beausite’s early history. And now, of course, it
makes no earthly difference to anybody. But there must be times when
Mme. Beausite remembers, and grins. Now that she’s begun to rouge again
she looks twenty years younger than the Duchess.??Ah,” she broke off,
abruptly signing to Campton.

He followed her glance to a table at which Julia Brant was seating
herself with the Tranlay ladies and George. Mayhew joined them, nobly
deferential, and the elder ladies lent him their intensest attention,
isolating George with the young girl.

“H’m,” Adele murmured, “not such a bad thing! They say the girl will
have half of old Montlhery’s money?he’s her mother’s uncle. And she’s
heaps handsomer than the other?not that _that_ seems to count any more!”

Campton shrugged the subject away. Yes; it would be a good thing if
George could be drawn from what his mother (with a retrospective
pinching of the lips) called his “wretched infatuation.” But the idea
that the boy might be coaxed into a marriage?and a rich marriage?by the
Brants, was even more distasteful to Campton. If he really loved Madge
Talkett better stick to her than let himself be cajoled away for such
reasons.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As the second part of the programme began, Campton and Boylston slipped
out together. Campton was oppressed and disturbed. “It’s queer,” he
said, taking Boylston’s arm to steer him through the dense darkness of
the streets; “all these people who’ve forgotten the war have suddenly
made me remember it.”

Boylston laughed. “Yes, I know.” He seemed preoccupied and
communicative, and the painter fancied he was going to lead the talk, as
usual, to Preparedness and America’s intervention; but after a pause he
said: “You haven’t been much at the office lately??”

“No,” Campton interrupted. “I’ve shirked abominably since George got
back. But now that he’s gone to the Brants’ you’ll see??”

“Oh, I didn’t mean it as a reproach, sir! How could you think it? We’re
running smoothly enough, as far as organization goes. That’s not what
bothers me??”

“You’re bothered?”

Yes; he was?and so, he added, was Miss Anthony. The trouble was, he went
on to explain, that Mr. Mayhew, after months of total indifference
(except when asked to “represent” them on official platforms) had
developed a disquieting interest in “The Friends of French Art.” He had
brought them, in the beginning, a certain amount of money (none of which
came out of his own pocket), and in consequence had been imprudently put
on the Financial Committee, so that he had a voice in the disposal of
funds, though till lately he had never made it heard. But now,
apparently, “Atrocities” were losing their novelty, and he was disposed
to transfer his whole attention to “The Friends of French Art,” with
results which seemed incomprehensibly disturbing to Boylston, until he
let drop the name of Mme. de Dolmetsch. Campton exclaimed at it.

“Well?yes. You must have noticed that she and Mr. Mayhew have been
getting pretty chummy. You see, he’s done such a lot of talking that
people think he’s at least an Oil King; and Mme. de Dolmetsch is
dazzled. But she’s got her musical prodigy to provide for??” and
Boylston outlined the situation which his astuteness had detected while
it developed unperceived under Campton’s dreaming eyes. Mr. Mayhew was
attending all their meetings now, finding fault, criticizing, asking to
have the accounts investigated, though they had always been audited at
regular intervals by expert accountants; and all this zeal originated in
the desire to put Mme. de Dolmetsch in Miss Anthony’s place, on the plea
that her greater social experience, her gift of attracting and
interesting, would bring in immense sums of money?whereas, Boylston
grimly hinted, they already had a large balance in the bank, and it was
with an eye to that balance that Mme. de Dolmetsch was forcing Mayhew to
press her claim.

“You see, sir, Mr. Mayhew never turns out to be as liberal as they
expect when they first hear him talk; and though Mme. de Dolmetsch has
him in her noose she’s not getting what she wants?by a long way. And so
they’ve cooked this up between them?she and Mme. Beausite?without his
actually knowing what they’re after.”

Campton stopped short, releasing Boylston’s arm. “But what you suggest
is abominable,” he exclaimed.

“Yes. I know it.” But the young man’s voice remained steady. “Well, I
wish you’d come to our meetings, now you’re back.”

“I will?I will! But I’m no earthly use on financial questions. You’re
much stronger there.”

He felt Boylston’s grin through the darkness. “Oh, they’ll have me out
too before long.”

“You? Nonsense! What do you mean?”

“I mean that lots of people are beginning to speculate in war
charities?oh, in all sorts of ways. Sometimes I’m sick to the point of
chucking it all. But Miss Anthony keeps me going.”

“Ah, she would!” Campton agreed.

As he walked home his mind was burdened with Boylston’s warning. It was
not merely the affair itself, but all it symbolized, that made his gorge
rise, made him, as Boylston said, sick to the point of wanting to chuck
it all?to chuck everything connected with this hideous world that was
dancing and flirting and money-making on the great red mounds of dead.
He grinned at the thought that he had once believed in the regenerative
power of war?the salutary shock of great moral and social upheavals. Yet
he _had_ believed in it, and never more intensely than at George’s
bedside at Doullens, in that air so cleansed by passion and pain that
mere living seemed a meaningless gesture compared to the chosen
surrender of life. But in the Paris to which he had returned after
barely four months of absence the instinct of self-preservation seemed
to have wiped all meaning from such words. Poor fatuous Mayhew dancing
to Mme. de Dolmetsch’s piping, Jorgenstein sinking under the weight of
his international honours, Mme. de Tranlay intriguing to push her
daughter in such society, and Julia placidly abetting her?Campton hardly
knew from which of these sorry visions he turned with a completer
loathing....

There were still the others, to be sure, the huge obscure majority; out
there in the night, the millions giving their lives for this handful of
trivial puppets, and here in Paris, and everywhere, in every country,
men and women toiling unweariedly to help and heal; but in Mrs.
Talkett’s drawing-room both fighters and toilers seemed to count as
little in relation to the merrymakers as Miss Anthony and Mlle. Davril
in relation to the brilliant people who had crowded their table into the
obscurest corner of the room.




                                  XXX


These thoughts continued to weigh on Campton; to shake them off he
decided, with one of his habitual quick jerks of resolution, to get back
to work. He knew that George would approve, and would perhaps be oftener
with him if he had something interesting on his easel. Sir Cyril
Jorgenstein had suggested that he would like to have his portrait
finished?with the Legion of Honour added to his lapel, no doubt. And
Harvey Mayhew, rosy and embarrassed, had dropped in to hint that, if
Campton could find time to do a charcoal head?oh, just one of those
brilliant sketches of his?of the young musical genius in whose career
their friend Mme. de Dolmetsch was so much interested.... But Campton
had cut them both short. He was not working?he had no plans for the
present. And in truth he had not thought even of attempting a portrait
of George. The impulse had come to him, once, as he sat by the boy’s
bed; but the face was too incomprehensible. He should have to learn and
unlearn too many things first??

At last, one day, it occurred to him to make a study of Mme. Lebel. He
saw _her_ in charcoal: her simple unquestioning anguish had turned her
old face to sculpture. Campton set his canvas on the easel, and started
to shout for her down the stairs; but as he opened the door he found
himself face to face with Mrs. Talkett.

“Oh,” she began at once, in her breathless way, “you’re here? The old
woman downstairs wasn’t sure?and I couldn’t leave all this money with
her, could I?”

“Money? What money?” he echoed.

She was very simply dressed, and a veil, drooping low from her hat-brim,
gave to her over-eager face a shadowy youthful calm.

“I _may_ come in?” she questioned, almost timidly; and as Campton let
her pass she added: “The money from the concert, of course?heaps and
heaps of it! I’d no idea we’d made so much. And I wanted to give it to
you myself.”

She shook a bulging bag out of her immense muff, while Campton continued
to stare at her.

“I didn’t know you went out so early,” he finally stammered, trying to
push a newspaper over the disordered remains of his breakfast.

She lifted interrogative eyebrows. “That means that I’m in the way?”

“No. But why did you bring that money here?”

She looked surprised. “Why not? Aren’t you the head?the real head of the
committee? And wasn’t the concert given in my house?” Her eyes rested on
him with renewed timidity. “Is it?disagreeable to you to see me?” she
asked.

“Disagreeable? My dear child, no.” He paused, increasingly embarrassed.
What did she expect him to say next? To thank her for having sent him
the orderly’s letter? It seemed to him impossible to plunge into the
subject uninvited. Surely it was for her to give him the opening, if she
wished to.

“Well, no!” she broke out. “I’ve never once pretended to you, have I?
The money’s a pretext. I wanted to see you?here, alone, with no one to
disturb us.”

Campton felt a confused stirring of relief and fear. All his old dread
of scenes, commotions, disturbing emergencies?of anything that should
upset his perpetually vibrating balance?was blent with the passionate
desire to hear what his visitor had to say.

“You?it was good of you to think of sending us that letter,” he
faltered.

She frowned in her anxious way and looked away from him. “Afterward I
was afraid you’d be angry.”

“Angry? How could I?” He groped for a word. “Surprised?yes. I knew
nothing ... nothing about you and....”

“Not even that it was I who bought the sketch of him?the one that Leonce
Black sold for you last year?”

The blood rushed to Campton’s face. Suddenly he felt himself trapped and
betrayed. “You?_you_? You’ve got that sketch?” The thought was somehow
intolerable to him.

“Ah, now you _are_ angry,” Mrs. Talkett murmured.

“No, no; but I never imagined??”

“I know. That was what frightened me?your suspecting nothing.” She
glanced about her, dropped to a corner of the divan, and tossed off her
hat with the old familiar gesture. “Oh, can I talk to you?” she pleaded.

Campton nodded.

“I wish you’d light your pipe, then, and sit down too.” He reached for
his pipe, struck a match, and slowly seated himself. “You always smoke a
pipe in the morning, don’t you? _He_ told me that,” she went on; then
she paused again and drew a long anxious breath. “Oh, he’s so changed! I
feel as if I didn’t know him any longer?do _you_?”

Campton looked at her with deepening wonder. This was more surprising
than discovering her to be the possessor of the picture; he had not
expected deep to call unto deep in their talk. “I’m not sure that I do,”
he confessed.

Her fidgeting eyes deepened and grew quieter. “Your saying so makes me
feel less lonely,” she sighed, half to herself. “But has he told you
nothing since he came back?really nothing?”

“Nothing. After all?how could he? I mean, without indiscretion?”

“Indiscretion? Oh??” She shrugged the word away with half a smile, as
though such considerations belonged to a prehistoric order of things.
“Then he hasn’t even told you that he wants me to get a divorce?”

“A divorce?” Campton exclaimed. He sat staring at her as if the weight
of his gaze might pin her down, keep her from fluttering away and
breaking up into luminous splinters. George wanted her to get a
divorce?wanted, therefore, to marry her! His passion went as deep for
her as that?too deep, Campton conjectured, for the poor little ephemeral
creature, who struck him as wriggling on it like a butterfly impaled.

“Please tell me,” he said at length; and suddenly, in short inconsequent
sentences, the confession poured from her.

George, it seemed, during the previous winter in New York, when they had
seen so much of each other, had been deeply attracted, had wanted
“everything,” and at once?and there had been moments of tension and
estrangement, when she had been held back by scruples she confessed she
no longer understood (inherited prejudices, she supposed), and when her
reluctance must have made her appear to be trifling, whereas, really it
was just that she couldn’t ... couldn’t.... So they had gone on for
several months, with the usual emotional ups-and-downs, till he had left
for Europe to join his father; and when they had parted she had given
him the half-promise that if they met abroad during the summer she would
perhaps ... after all....

Then came the war. George had been with her during those few last hours
in Paris, and had dined with her and her husband (had Campton forgiven
her?) the night before he was mobilised. And then, when he was gone, she
had understood that only timidity, vanity, the phantom barriers of old
terrors and traditions, had prevented her being to him all that he
wanted....

She broke off abruptly, put in a few conventional words about an
ill-assorted marriage, and never having been “really understood,” and
then, as if guessing that she was on the wrong tack, jumped up, walked
to the other end of the studio, and turned back to Campton with the
tears running down her ravaged face.

“And now?and now?he says he won’t have me!” she lamented.

“Won’t have you? But you tell me he wants you to be divorced.”

She nodded, wiped away the tears, and in so doing stole an unconscious
glance at the mirror above the divan. Then, seeing that the glance was
detected, she burst into a sort of sobbing laugh. “My nose gets so
dreadfully red when I cry,” she stammered.

Campton took no notice, and she went on: “A divorce? Yes. And unless I
do?unless I agree to marry him?we’re never to be anything but friends.”

“That’s what he says?”

“Yes. Oh, we’ve been all in and out of it a hundred times.”

She pulled out a gold-mesh bag and furtively restored her complexion, as
Mrs. Brant had once done in the same place.

Campton sat still, considering. He had let his pipe go out. Nothing
could have been farther from the revelation he had expected, and his own
perplexity was hardly less great than his visitor’s. Certainly it was
not the way in which young men had behaved in his day?nor, evidently,
had it been George’s before the war.

Finally he made up his mind to put the question: “And Talkett?”

She burst out at once: “Ah, that’s what I say?it’s not so simple!”

“What isn’t?”

“Breaking up?all one’s life.” She paused with a deepening embarrassment.
“Of course Roger has made me utterly miserable?but then I know he really
hasn’t meant to.”

“Have you told George that?”

“Yes. But he says we must first of all be aboveboard. He says he sees
everything differently now. That’s what I mean when I say that I don’t
understand him. He says love’s not the same kind of feeling to him that
it was. There’s something of Meredith’s that he quotes?I wish I could
remember it?something about a mortal lease.”

“Good Lord,” Campton groaned, not so much at the hopelessness of the
case as at the hopelessness of quoting Meredith to her. After a while he
said abruptly: “You must forgive my asking: but things change
sometimes?they change imperceptibly. Do you think he’s as much in love
with you as ever?”

He had been half afraid of offending her: but she appeared to consider
the question impartially, and without a shadow of resentment. “Sometimes
I think more?because in the beginning it wasn’t meant to last. And
now?if he wants to marry me? Oh, I wish I knew what to do!”

Campton continued to ponder. “There’s one more question, since we’re
talking frankly: what does Talkett know of all this?”

She looked frightened. “Oh, nothing, nothing!”

“And you’ve no idea how he would take it?”

She examined the question with tortured eyebrows, and at length, to
Campton’s astonishment, brought out: “Magnificently??”

“He’d be generous, you mean? But it would go hard with him?”

“Oh, dreadfully, dreadfully!” She seemed to need the assurance to
restore her shaken self-approval.

Campton rose with a movement of pity and laid his hand on her shoulder.
“My dear child, if your husband cares for you, give up my son.”

Her face fell, and she drew back. “Oh, but you don’t understand?not in
the least! It’s not possible?it’s not moral??. You know I’m all for the
new morality. First of all, we must be true to self.” She paused, and
then broke out: “You tell me to give him up because you think he’s tired
of me. But he’s not?I know he’s not! It’s his new ideas that you don’t
understand, any more than I do. It’s the war that has changed him. He
says he wants only things that last?that are permanent?things that hold
a man fast. That sometimes he feels as if he were being swept away on a
flood, and were trying to catch at things?at anything?as he’s rushed
along under the waves.... He says he wants quiet, monotony ... to be
sure the same things will happen every day. When we go out together he
sometimes stands for a quarter of an hour and stares at the same
building, or at the Seine under the bridges. But he’s happy, I’m
sure.... I’ve never seen him happier ... only it’s in a way I can’t make
out....”

“Ah, my dear, if it comes to that?I’m not sure that I can. Not sure
enough to help you, I’m afraid.”

She looked at him, disappointed. “You won’t speak to him then?”

“Not unless he speaks to me.”

“Ah, he frightens you?just as he does me!”

She pulled her hat down on her troubled brow, gathered up her furs, and
took another sidelong peep at the glass. Then she turned toward the
door. On the threshold she paused and looked back at Campton. “Don’t you
see,” she cried, “that if I were to give George up he’d get himself sent
straight back to the front?”

Campton’s heart gave an angry leap; for a second he felt the impulse to
strike her, to catch her by the shoulders and bundle her out of the
room. With a great effort he controlled himself and opened the door.

“You don’t understand?you don’t understand!” she called back to him once
again from the landing.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Madge Talkett had asked him to speak to his son: he had refused, and she
had retaliated by planting that poisoned shaft in him. But what had
retaliation to do with it? She had probably spoken the simple truth, and
with the natural desire to enlighten him. If George wanted to marry her,
it must be (since human nature, though it might change its vocabulary,
kept its instincts), it must be that he was very much in love?and in
that case her refusal would in truth go hard with him, and it would be
natural that he should try to get himself sent away from Paris.... From
Paris, yes; but not necessarily to the front. After such wounds and such
honours he had only to choose; a staff-appointment could easily be got.
Or, no doubt, with his two languages, he might, if he preferred, have
himself sent on a military mission to America. With all this propaganda
talk, wasn’t he the very type of officer they wanted for the neutral
countries?

It was Campton’s dearest wish that George should stay where he was; he
knew his peace of mind would vanish the moment his son was out of sight.
But he suspected that George would soon weary of staff-work, or of any
form of soldiering at the rear, and try for the trenches if he left
Paris; whereas, in Paris, Madge Talkett might hold him?as she had meant
his father to see.

The first thing, then, was to make sure of a job at the War Office.

Campton turned and tossed like a sick man on the hard bed of his
problem. To plan, to scheme, to plot and circumvent?nothing was more
hateful to him, there was nothing in which he was less skilled. If only
he dared to consult Adele Anthony! But Adele was still incorrigibly
warlike, and her having been in George’s secret while his parents were
excluded from it left no doubt as to the side on which her influence
would bear. She loved the boy, Campton sometimes thought, even more
passionately than his mother did; but?how did the old song go??she loved
honour, or her queer conception of it, more. Ponder as he would, he
could not picture her, even now, lifting a finger to keep George back.

Campton struggled all the morning with these questions. After lunch he
pocketed Mrs. Talkett’s moneybag and carried it to the Palais Royal,
where he discovered Harvey Mayhew in confabulation with Mme. Beausite,
who still trailed her ineffectual beauty about the office. The painter
thought he detected a faint embarrassment in the glance with which they
both greeted him.

“Hallo, Campton! Looking for our good friend Boylston? He’s off duty
this afternoon, Mme. Beausite tells me; as he is pretty often in these
days, I’ve noticed,” Mr. Mayhew sardonically added. “In fact, the office
has rather been left to run itself lately?eh? Of course our good Miss
Anthony is absorbed with her refugees?gives us but a divided allegiance.
And Boylston?well, young men, young men! Of course it’s been a weary
pull for him. By the way, my dear fellow,” Mr. Mayhew continued, as
Campton appeared about to turn away, “I called at Mrs. Talkett’s just
now to ask for the money from the concert?a good round sum, I hear it
is?and she told me she’d given it to you. Have you brought it with you?
If so, Mme. Beausite here would take charge of it??”

Mme. Beausite turned her great resigned eyes on the painter. “Mr.
Campton knows I’m very careful. I will lock it up till his friend’s
return. Now that Mr. Boylston is so much away I very often have such
responsibilities.”

Campton’s eyes returned her glance; but he did not waver. “Thanks so
much; but as the sum is rather large it seems to me the bank’s the
proper place. Will you please tell Boylston I’ve deposited it?”

Mr. Mayhew’s benevolent pink turned to an angry red. For a moment
Campton thought he was about to say something foolish. But he merely
bent his head stiffly, muttered a vague phrase about “irregular
proceedings,” and returned to his seat by Mme. Beausite’s desk.

As for Campton, his words had decided his course: he would take the
money at once to Bullard and Brant’s and seize the occasion to see the
banker. Mr. Brant was the only person with whom, at this particular
juncture, he cared to talk of George.




                                  XXXI


Mr. Brant’s private office was as glitteringly neat as when Campton had
entered it for the first time, and seen the fatal telegram about Benny
Upsher marring the order of the desk.

Now he crossed the threshold with different feelings. To have Mr. Brant
look up and smile, to shake hands with him, accept one of his cigars,
and sink into one of the blue leather armchairs, seemed to be in the
natural order of things. He felt only the relief of finding himself with
the one person likely to understand.

“About George??” he began.

“Yes?” said Mr. Brant briskly. “It’s curious?I was just thinking of
looking you up. It’s his birthday next Tuesday, you know.”

“Oh??” said the father, slightly put off. He had not come to talk of
birthdays; nor did he need to be reminded of his son’s by Mr. Brant. He
concluded that Mr. Brant would be less easy to get on with in Paris than
at the front.

“And we thought of celebrating the day by a little party?a dinner, with
perhaps the smallest kind of a dance: or just bridge?yes, probably just
bridge,” the banker added tentatively. “Opinions differ as to the
suitability?it’s for his mother to decide. But of course no evening
clothes; and we hoped perhaps to persuade you. Our only object is to
amuse him?to divert his mind from this wretched entanglement.”

It was doubtful if Mr. Brant had ever before made so long a speech,
except perhaps at a board meeting; and then only when he read the annual
report. He turned pink and stared over Campton’s shoulder at the
panelled white wall, on which a false Reynolds hung.

Campton meditated. The blush was the blush of Mr. Brant, but the voice
was the voice of Julia. Still, it was probable that neither husband nor
wife was aware how far matters had gone with Mrs. Talkett.

“George is more involved than you think,” Campton said.

Mr. Brant looked startled.

“In what way?”

“He means to marry her. He insists on her getting a divorce.”

“A divorce? Good gracious,” murmured Mr. Brant. He turned over a jade
paper-cutter, trying its edge absently on his nail. “Does Julia???” he
began at length.

Campton shook his head. “No; I wanted to speak to you first.”

Mr. Brant gave his quick bow. He was evidently gratified, and the
sentiment stimulated his faculties, as it had when he found that Campton
no longer resented his presence at the hospital. His small effaced
features took on a businesslike sharpness, and he readjusted his
eye-glasses and straightened the paper-cutter, which he had put back on
the desk a fraction of an inch out of its habitual place.

“You had this from George?” he asked.

“No; from her. She’s been to see me. _She_ doesn’t want to divorce.
She’s in love with him; in her way, that is; but she’s frightened.”

“And that makes him the more eager?”

“The more determined, at any rate.”

Mr. Brant appeared to seize the distinction. “George can be very
determined.”

“Yes. I think his mother ought to be made to understand that all this
talk about a wretched entanglement isn’t likely to make him any less
so.”

Mr. Brant’s look seemed to say that making Julia understand had proved a
no less onerous task for his maturity than for Campton’s youth.

“If you don’t object?perhaps the matter might, for the present, continue
to be kept between you and me,” he suggested.

“Oh, by all means. What I want,” Campton pursued, “is to get him out of
this business altogether. They wouldn’t be happy?they couldn’t be. She’s
too much like??” He broke off, frightened at what he had been about to
say. “Too much,” he emended, “like the usual fool of a woman that every
boy of George’s age thinks he wants simply because he can’t get her.”

“And you say she came to you for advice?”

“She came to me to persuade him to give up the idea of a divorce.
Apparently she’s ready for anything short of that. It’s a queer
business. She seems sorry for Talkett in a way.”

Mr. Brant marked his sense of the weight of this by a succession of
attentive nods. He put his hands in his pockets, leaned back, and tilted
his dapper toes against the gold-trellised scrap-basket. The attitude
seemed to change the pale panelling of his background into a
glass-and-mahogany Wall Street office.

“Won’t he be satisfied with?er?all the rest, so to speak; since you say
she offers it?”

“No; he won’t. There’s the difficulty. It seems it’s the new view. The
way the young men feel since the war. He wants her for his wife. Nothing
less.”

“Ah, he respects her,” murmured Mr. Brant, impressed; and Campton
reflected that he had no doubt respected Julia.

“And what she wants is to get you to persuade him?to accept less?”

“Well?something of the sort.”

Mr. Brant sat up and dropped his heels to the floor. “Well,
then?_don’t_!” he snapped.

“Don’t???”

“Persuade her, on the contrary, to keep him hoping?to make him think she
means to marry him. Don’t you see?” Mr. Brant exclaimed, almost
impatiently. “Don’t you see that if she turns him down definitely he’ll
be scheming to get away, to get back to the front, the minute his leave
is over? Tell her that?appeal to her on that ground. Make her do it. She
will if she’s in love with him. And we can’t stop him from going
back?not one of us. He’s restless here already?I know that. Always
talking about his men, saying he’s got to get back to them. The only way
is to hold him by this girl. She’s the very influence we need!”

He threw it all out in sharp terse phrases, as a business man might try
to hammer facts about an investment into the bewildered brain of an
unpractical client. Campton felt the blood rising to his forehead, not
so much in anger at Mr. Brant as at the sense of his own inward
complicity.

“There’s no earthly reason why George should ever go back to the front,”
he said.

“None whatever. We can get him any staff-job he chooses. His mother’s
already got the half-promise of a post for him at the War Office. But
you’ll see, you’ll see! We can’t stop him. Did we before? There’s only
this woman who can do it!”

Campton looked over the banker’s head at the reflection of the false
Reynolds in the mirror. That any one should have been fool enough to pay
a big price for such a patent fraud seemed to him as incomprehensible as
his own present obtuseness seemed to the banker.

“You do see, don’t you?” argued Mr. Brant anxiously.

“Oh, I suppose so.” Campton slowly got to his feet. The adroit brushwork
of the forged picture fascinated him, and he went up to look at it more
closely. Mr. Brant pursued him with a gratified glance.

“Ah, you’re admiring my Reynolds. I paid a thumping price for it?but
that’s always my principle. Pay high, but get the best. It’s a better
investment.”

“Just so,” Campton assented dully. Mr. Brant seemed suddenly divided
from him by the whole width of the gulf between that daub on the wall
and a real Reynolds. They had nothing more to say to each other?nothing
whatever. “Well, goodbye.” He held out his hand.

“Think it over?think it over,” Mr. Brant called out after him as he
enfiladed the sumptuous offices, a medalled veteran holding back each
door.

It was not until Campton was back at Montmartre, and throwing off his
coat to get into his old studio clothes, that he felt in his pocket the
weight of the forgotten concert-money. It was too late in the day to
take it back to the bank, even if he had had the energy to retrace his
steps; and he decided to hand the bag over to Boylston, with whom he was
dining that night to meet the elder Dastrey, home on a brief leave from
his ambulance.

                  *       *       *       *       *

“Think it over!” Mr. Brant’s adjuration continued to echo in Campton’s
ears. As if he needed to be told to think it over! Once again the
war-worn world had vanished from his mind, and he saw only George,
himself and George, George and safety, George and peace. They blamed
women who were cowards about their husbands, mistresses who schemed to
protect their lovers! Well?he was as bad as any one of them, if it came
to that. His son had bought his freedom, had once offered his life and
nearly lost it. Brant was right: at all costs they must keep him from
rushing back into that hell.

That Mrs. Talkett should be the means of securing his safety was bitter
enough. This trivial barren creature to be his all?it seemed the parody
of Campton’s own youth! And Julia, after all, had been only a girl when
he had met her, inexperienced and still malleable. A man less absorbed
in his art, less oblivious of the daily material details of life, might
conceivably have made something of her. But this little creature, with
her farrago of false ideas, her vanity, her restlessness, her
undisguised desire to keep George and yet not lose her world, had
probably reached the term of her development, and would trip on through
an eternal infancy of fads and frenzies.

Luckily, as Mr. Brant said, they could use her for the time; use her
better, no doubt, than had she been a more finely tempered instrument.
Campton was still pondering on these things as he set out for the
restaurant where he had agreed to meet Boylston and Dastrey. At the foot
of his own stairs he was surprised to run against Boylston under the
porte-cochere. They gave each other a quick questioning look, as men did
when they encountered each other unexpectedly in those days.

“Anything up? Oh, the money?you’ve come for the money?” Campton
remembered that he had left the bag upstairs.

“The money? Haven’t you heard? Louis Dastrey’s killed,” said Boylston.

They stood side by side in the doorway, while Campton’s darkened mind
struggled anew with the mystery of fate. Almost every day now the same
readjustment had to be gone through: the cowering averted mind dragged
upward and forced to visualize a new gap in the ranks, and summon the
remaining familiar figures to fill it up and blot it out. And to-day
this cruel gymnastic was to be performed for George’s best friend, the
elder Dastrey’s sole stake in life! Only a few days ago the lad had
passed through Paris, just back from America, and in haste to rejoin his
regiment; alive and eager, throbbing with ideas, with courage, mirth and
irony?the very material France needed to rebuild her ruins and beget her
sons! And now, struck down as George had been?not to rise like
George....

Once more the inner voice in Campton questioned distinctly: “Could you
bear it?” and again he answered: “Less than ever!”

Aloud he asked: “Paul?”

“Oh, he went off at once. To break the news to Louis’ mother in the
country.”

“The boy was all Paul had left.”

“Yes.”

“What difference would it have made in the war, if he’d just stayed on
at his job in America?”

Boylston did not answer, and the two stood silent, looking out
unseeingly at the black empty street. There was nothing left to say,
nowadays, when such blows fell; hardly anything left to feel, it
sometimes seemed.

“Well, I suppose we must go and eat something,” the older man said; and
arm in arm they went out into the darkness.

When Campton returned home that night he sat down and, with the help of
several pipes, wrote a note to Mrs. Talkett asking when she would
receive him.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Thereafter he tried to go back to his painting and to continue his daily
visits to the Palais Royal office. But for the time nothing seemed to
succeed with him. He threw aside his study of Mme. Lebel?he hung about
the office, confused and idle, and with the ever clearer sense that
there also things were disintegrating.

George’s birthday party had been given up on account of young Dastrey’s
death. Mrs. Brant evidently thought the postponement unnecessary; since
George’s return she had gone over heart and soul to the “business as
usual” party. But Mr. Brant quietly sided with George; and Campton was
glad to be spared the necessity of celebrating the day in such a
setting.

It was some time since Campton had seen his son; but the fault was not
his son’s. The painter was aware of having voluntarily avoided George.
He said to himself: “As long as I know he’s safe why should I bother
him?” But in reality he did not feel himself to be fit company for any
one, and had even shunned poor Paul Dastrey on the latter’s hurried
passage through Paris, when he had come back from carrying the fatal
news to young Dastrey’s mother.

“What on earth could Paul and I have found to say to each other?”
Campton argued with himself. “For men of our age there’s nothing left to
say nowadays. The only thing I can do is to try to work up one of my old
studies of Louis. That might please him a little?later on.”

But after one or two attempts he pushed away that canvas too.

At length one afternoon George came in. They had not met for over a
week, and as George’s blue uniform detached itself against the blurred
tapestries of the studio, the north light modelling the fresh curves of
his face, the father’s heart gave a leap of pride. His son had never
seemed to him so young and strong and vivid.

George, with a sudden blush, took his hand in a long pressure.

“I say, Dad?Madge has told me. Told me that you know about us and that
you’ve persuaded her to see things as I do. She hadn’t had a chance to
speak to me of your visit till last night.”

Campton felt his colour rising; but though his own part in the business
still embarrassed him he was glad that the barriers were down.

“I didn’t want,” George continued, still flushed and slightly
constrained, “to say anything to you about all this till I could say:
‘Here’s my wife.’ And now she’s promised.”

“She’s promised?”

“Thanks to you, you know. Your visit to her did it. She told me the
whole thing yesterday. How she’d come here in desperation, to ask you to
help her, to have her mind cleared up for her; and how you’d thought it
all over, and then gone to see her, and how wise and perfect you’d been
about it all. Poor child?if you knew the difference it’s made to her!”

They were seated now, the littered table between them. Campton, his
elbows on it, his chin on his hands, looked across at his son, who faced
the light.

“The difference to you too?” he questioned.

George smiled: it was exactly the same detached smile which he used to
shed on the little nurse who brought him his cocoa.

“Of course. Now I can go back without worrying.” He let the words fall
as carelessly as if there were nothing in them to challenge attention.

“Go back?” Campton stared at him with a blank countenance. Had he heard
aright? The noise of a passing lorry suddenly roared in his ears like
the guns of the front.

“Did you say: _go back_?”

George opened his blue eyes wide. “Why, of course; as soon as ever I’m
patched up. You didn’t think???”

“I thought you had the sense to realize that you’ve done your share in
one line, and that your business now is to do it in another.”

The same detached smile again brushed George’s lips. “But if I happen to
have only one line?”

“Nonsense! You know they don’t think that at the War Office.”

“I don’t believe the War Office will shut down if I leave it.”

“What an argument! It sounds like??” Campton, breaking off on a sharp
breath, closed his lids for a second. He had been gazing too steadily
into George’s eyes, and now at last he knew what that mysterious look in
them meant. It was Benny Upsher’s look, of course?inaccessible to
reason, beyond reason, belonging to other spaces, other weights and
measures, over the edge, somehow, of the tangible calculable world....

“A man can’t do more than his duty: you’ve done that,” he growled.

But George insisted with his gentle obstinacy: “You’ll feel differently
about it when America comes in.”

Campton shook his head. “Never about your case.”

“You will?when you see how we all feel. When we’re all in it you
wouldn’t have me looking on, would you? And then there are my men?I’ve
got to get back to my men.”

“But you’ve no right to go now; no business,” his father broke in
violently. “Persuading that poor girl to wreck her life ... and then
leaving her, planting her there with her past ruined, and her future....
George, you can’t!”

George, in his long months of illness, had lost his old ruddiness of
complexion. At his father’s challenge the blood again rose the more
visibly to his still-gaunt cheeks and white forehead: he was evidently
struck.

“You’ll kill her?and kill your mother!” Campton stormed.

“Oh, it’s not for to-morrow. Not for a long time, perhaps. My shoulder’s
still too stiff. I was stupid,” the young man haltingly added, “to put
it as I did. Of course I’ve got to think of Madge now,” he acknowledged,
“as well as mother.”

The blood flowed slowly back to Campton’s heart. “You’ve got to think
of?just the mere common-sense of the thing. That’s all I ask. You’ve
done your turn; you’ve done more. But never mind that. Now it’s
different. You’re barely patched up: you’re of use, immense use, for
staff-work, and you know it. And you’ve asked a woman to tie up her
future to yours?at what cost you know too. It’s as much your duty to
keep away from the front now as it was before?well, I admit it?to go
there. You’ve done just what I should have wanted my son to do, up to
this minute??”

George laid a hand on his a little wistfully. “Then just go on trusting
me.”

“I do?to see that I’m right! If I can’t convince you, ask Boylston?ask
Adele!”

George sat staring down at the table. For the first time since they had
met at Doullens Campton was conscious of reaching his son’s inner mind,
and of influencing it.

“I wonder if you really love her?” he suddenly risked.

The question did not seem to offend George, scarcely to surprise him.
“Of course,” he said simply. “Only?well, everything’s different
nowadays, isn’t it? So many of the old ideas have come to seem such
humbug. That’s what I want to drag her out of?the coils and coils of
stale humbug. They were killing her.”

“Well?take care _you_ don’t,” Campton said, thinking that everything was
different indeed, as he recalled the reasons young men had had for
loving and marrying in his own time.

A faint look of amusement came into George’s eyes. “Kill her? Oh, no.
I’m gradually bringing her to life. But all this is hard to talk
about?yet. By-and-bye you’ll understand; she’ll show you, we’ll show you
together. But at present nothing’s to be said?to any one, please, not
even to mother. Madge thinks this is no time for such things. There, of
course, I don’t agree; but I must be patient. The secrecy, the
under-handedness, are hateful to me; but for her it’s all a part of the
sacred humbug.”

He rose listlessly, as if the discussion had bled all the life out of
him, and took himself away.

When he had gone his father drew a deep breath. Yes?the boy would stay
in Paris; he would almost certainly stay; for the present, at any rate.
And people were still prophesying that in the spring there would be a
big push all along the line; and after that the nightmare might be over.
Campton was glad he had gone to see Madge Talkett. He was glad, above
all, that if the thing had to be done it was over, and that, by Madge’s
wish, no one was to know of what had passed between them. It was a
distinct relief, in spite of what he had suggested to George, not to
have to carry that particular problem to Adele Anthony or Boylston.

A few days later George accepted a staff-appointment in Paris.




                                BOOK IV




                                 XXXII


Heavily the weeks went by.

The world continued to roar on through smoke and flame, and contrasted
with that headlong race was the slow dragging lapse of hours and days to
those who had to wait on events inactively.

When Campton met Paul Dastrey for the first time after the death of the
latter’s nephew, the two men exchanged a long hand-clasp and then sat
silent. As Campton had felt from the first, there was nothing left for
them to say to each other. If young men like Louis Dastrey must continue
to be sacrificed by hundreds of thousands to save their country, for
whom was the country being saved? Was it for the wasp-waisted youths in
sham uniforms who haunted the reawakening hotels and restaurants, in the
frequent intervals between their ambulance trips to safe distances from
the front? Or for the elderly men like Dastrey and Campton, who could
only sit facing each other with the spectre of the lost between them?
Young Dastrey, young Fortin-Lescluze, Rene Davril, Benny Upsher?and how
many hundreds more each day! And not even a child left by most of them,
to carry on the faith they had died for....

“If we’re giving all we care for so that those little worms can reopen
their dance-halls on the ruins, what in God’s name _is_ left?” Campton
questioned.

Dastrey sat looking at the ground, his grey head bent between his hands.
“France,” he said.

“What’s France, with no men left?”

“Well?I suppose, an Idea.”

“Yes. I suppose so.” Campton stood up heavily.

An Idea: they must cling to that. If Dastrey, from the depths of his
destitution, could still feel it and live by it, why did it not help
Campton more? An Idea: that was what France, ever since she had existed,
had always been in the story of civilization; a luminous point about
which striving visions and purposes could rally. And in that sense she
had been as much Campton’s spiritual home as Dastrey’s; to thinkers,
artists, to all creators, she had always been a second country. If
France went, western civilization went with her; and then all they had
believed in and been guided by would perish. That was what George had
felt; it was what had driven him from the Argonne to the Aisne. Campton
felt it too; but dully, through a fog. His son was safe; yes?but too
many other men’s sons were dying. There was no spot where his thoughts
could rest: there were moments when the sight of George, intact and
immaculate?his arm at last out of its sling?rose before his father like
a reproach.

The feeling was senseless; but there it was. Whenever the young man
entered the room Campton saw him attended by the invisible host of his
comrades, the fevered, the maimed and the dying. The Germans had
attacked at Verdun: horrible daily details of the struggle were pouring
in. No one at the rear had really known, except in swift fitful flashes,
about the individual suffering of the first months of the war; now such
information was systematized and distributed everywhere, daily, with a
cold impartial hand. And every night, when one laid one’s old bones on
one’s bed, there were those others, the young in their thousands, lying
down, perhaps never to rise again, in the mud and blood of the trenches.

Even Boylston’s Preparedness was beginning to get on Campton’s nerves.
He tried to picture to himself how he should exult when his country at
last fell into line; but he could realize only what his humiliation
would be if she did not. It was almost a relief, at this time, to have
his mind diverted to the dissensions among “The Friends of French Art,”
where, at a stormy meeting, Harvey Mayhew, as a member of the Finance
Committee, had asked for an accounting of the money taken in at Mrs.
Talkett’s concert. This money, Mr. Mayhew stated, had passed through a
number of hands. It should have been taken over by Mr. Boylston, as
treasurer, at the close of the performance; but he had failed to claim
it?had, in fact, been unfindable when the organizers of the concert
brought their takings to Mrs. Talkett?and the money, knocking about from
hand to hand, had finally been carried by Mrs. Talkett herself to Mr.
Campton. The latter, when asked to entrust it to Mr. Mayhew, had refused
on the ground that he had already deposited it in the bank; but a number
of days later it was known to be still in his possession. All this time
Mr. Boylston, treasurer, and chairman of the Financial Committee,
appeared to think it quite in order that the funds should have been (as
he assumed) deposited in the bank by a member who was not on that
particular committee, and who, in reality, had forgotten that they were
in his possession.

Mr. Mayhew delivered himself of this indictment amid an embarrassed
silence. To Campton it had seemed as if a burst of protest must
instantly clear the air. But after he himself had apologized for his
negligence in not depositing the money, and Boylston had disengaged his
responsibility in a few quiet words, there followed another blank
interval. Then Mr. Mayhew suddenly suggested a complete reorganization
of the work. He had something to criticize in every department. He, who
so seldom showed himself at the office, now presented a list of
omissions and commissions against which one after another of the active
members rose to enter a mild denial. It was clear that some one
belonging to the organization, and who was playing into his hands, had
provided him with a series of cleverly falsified charges against the
whole group of workers.

Presently Campton could stand it no longer, and, jumping up, suddenly
articulate, he flung into his cousin’s face a handful of home-truths
under which he expected that glossy countenance to lose its lustre. But
Mr. Mayhew bore the assault with urbanity. It did not behove him, he
said, to take up the reproaches addressed to him by the most
distinguished member of their committee?the most distinguished, he might
surely say without offence to any of the others (a murmur of assent); it
did not behove him, because one of the few occasions on which a great
artist may be said to be at a disadvantage is when he is trying to
discuss business matters with a man of business. He, Mr. Mayhew, was
only that, nothing more; but he _was_ that, and he had been trained to
answer random abuse by hard facts. In no way did he intend to reflect on
the devoted labours of certain ladies of the committee, nor on their
sympathetic treasurer’s gallant efforts to acquire, amid all his other
pressing interests, the rudiments of business habits; but Miss Anthony
had all along been dividing her time between two widely different
charities, and Mr. Boylston, like his distinguished champion, was first
of all an artist, with the habits of the studio rather than of the
office. In the circumstances??

Campton jumped to his feet again. If he stayed a moment longer he felt
he should knock Mayhew down. He jammed his hat on, shouted out “I
resign,” and limped out of the room.

It was the way in which his encounters with practical difficulties
always ended. The consciousness of his inferiority in argument, the
visionary’s bewilderment when incomprehensible facts are thrust on him
by fluent people, the helpless sense of not knowing what to answer, and
of seeing his dream-world smashed in the rough-and-tumble of shabby
motives?it all gave him the feeling that he was drowning, and must fight
his way to the surface before they had him under.

In the street he stood in a cold sweat of remorse. He knew the charges
of negligence against Miss Anthony and Boylston were trumped up. He knew
there was an answer to be made, and that he was the man to make it; and
his eyes filled with tears of rage and self-pity at his own
incompetence. But then he took heart at the thought of Boylston’s
astuteness and Miss Anthony’s courage. They would not let themselves be
beaten?probably they would fight their battle better without him. He
tried to protect his retreat with such arguments, and when he got back
to the studio he called up Mme. Lebel, and plunged again into his
charcoal study of her head. He did not remember having ever worked with
such supernatural felicity: it was as if _that_ were his victorious
answer to all their lies and intrigues....

But the Mayhew party was victorious too. How it came about a mind like
Campton’s could not grasp. Mr. Mayhew, it appeared, had let fall that a
very large gift of money from the world-renowned philanthropist, Sir
Cyril Jorgenstein (obtained through the good offices of Mmes. de
Dolmetsch and Beausite) was contingent on certain immediate changes in
the organization (“drastic changes” was Mr. Mayhew’s phrase); and
thereupon several hitherto passive members had suddenly found voice to
assert the duty of not losing this gift. After that the way was clear.
Adele Anthony and Boylston were offered ornamental posts which they
declined, and within a week the Palais Royal saw them no more, and Paris
drawing-rooms echoed with the usual rumours of committee wrangles and
dark discoveries.

The episode left Campton with a bitter taste in his soul. It seemed to
him like an ugly little allegory of Germany’s manœuvring the world into
war. The speciousness of Mr. Mayhew’s arguments, the sleight-of-hand by
which he had dislodged the real workers and replaced them by his
satellites, reminded the painter of the neutrals who were beginning to
say that there were two sides to every question, that war was always
cruel, and how about the Russian atrocities in Silesia? As the months
dragged on a breath of lukewarmness had begun to blow through the world,
damping men’s souls, confusing plain issues, casting a doubt on the
worth of everything. People were beginning to ask what one knew, after
all, of the secret motives which had impelled half-a-dozen
self-indulgent old men ensconced in Ministerial offices to plunge the
world in ruin. No one seemed to feel any longer that life is something
more than being alive; apparently the only people not tired of the
thought of death were the young men still pouring out to it in their
thousands.

Still those thousands poured; still the young died; still, wherever
Campton went, he met elderly faces, known and unknown, disfigured by
grief, shrunken with renunciation. And still the months wore on without
result.

One day in crossing the Tuileries he felt the same soft sparkle which,
just about a year earlier, had abruptly stirred the sap in him. Yes?it
was nearly a year since the day when he had noticed the first
horse-chestnut blossoms, and been reminded by Mme. Lebel that he ought
to buy some new shirts; and though to-day the horse-chestnuts were still
leafless they were already misty with buds, and the tall white clouds
above them full-uddered with spring showers. It was spring again, spring
with her deluding promises?her gilding of worn stones and chilly water,
the mystery of her distances, the finish and brilliance of her nearer
strokes. Campton, in spite of himself, drank down the life-giving
draught and felt its murmur in his veins. And just then, across the
width of the gardens he saw, beyond a stretch of turf and clipped
shrubs, two people, also motionless, who seemed to have the same cup at
their lips. He recognized his son and Mrs. Talkett.

Their backs were toward him, and they stood close together, looking with
the same eyes at the same sight: an Apollo touched with flying sunlight.
After a while they walked on again, slowly and close to each other.
George, as they moved, seemed now and then to point out some beauty of
sculpture, or the colour of a lichened urn; and once they turned and
took their fill of the great perspective tapering to the Arch?the Arch
on which Rude’s Mænad-Marseillaise still yelled her battalions on to
death.




                                 XXXIII


Campton finished his charcoal of Mme. Lebel; then he attacked her in
oils. Now that his work at the Palais Royal was ended, painting was once
more his only refuge.

Adele Anthony had returned to her refugees; Boylston, pale and
obstinate, toiled on at Preparedness. But Campton found it impossible to
take up any new form of work; his philanthropic ardour was exhausted. He
could only shut himself up, for long solitary hours, in the empty and
echoing temple of his art.

George emphatically approved of his course: George was as insistent as
Mrs. Brant on the duty of “business as usual.” But on the young man’s
lips the phrase had a different meaning; it seemed the result of that
altered perspective which Campton was conscious of whenever, nowadays,
he tried to see things as his son saw them. George was not indifferent,
he was not callous; but he seemed to feel himself mysteriously set
apart, destined to some other task for which he was passively waiting.
Even the split among “The Friends of French Art” left him, despite of
his admiration for Boylston, curiously unperturbed. He seemed to have
taken the measure of all such ephemeral agitations, and to regard them
with an indulgent pity which was worse than coldness.

“He feels that all we do is so useless,” Campton said to Dastrey; “he’s
like a gardener watching ants rebuild their hill in the middle of a
path, and knowing all the while that hill and path are going to be wiped
out by his pick.”

“Ah, they’re all like that,” Dastrey murmured.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Mme. Lebel came up to the studio every afternoon. The charcoal study had
been only of her head; but for the painting Campton had seated her in
her own horsehair armchair, her smoky lamp beside her, her sewing in her
lap. More than ever he saw in the wise old face something typical of its
race and class: the obstinate French gift, as some one had put it, of
making one more effort after the last effort. The old woman could not
imagine why he wanted to paint her; but when one day he told her it was
for her grandsons, her eyes filled, and she said: “For which one, sir?
For they’re both at Verdun.”

One autumn afternoon he was late in getting back to the studio, where he
knew she was waiting for him. He pushed the door open, and there, in the
beaten-down attitude in which he had once before seen her, she lay
across the table, her cap awry, her hands clutching her sewing, and
George kneeling at her side. The young man’s arm was about her, his head
pressed against her breast; and on the floor lay the letter, the fatal
letter which was always, nowadays, the key to such scenes.

Neither George nor the old woman had heard Campton enter; and for a
moment he stood and watched them. George’s face, so fair and ruddy
against Mme. Lebel’s rusty black, wore a look of boyish compassion which
Campton had never seen on it. Mme. Lebel had sunk into his hold as if it
soothed and hushed her; and Campton said to himself: “These two are
closer to each other than George and I, because they’ve both seen the
horror face to face. He knows what to say to her ever so much better
than he knows what to say to his mother or me.”

But apparently there was no need to say much. George continued to kneel
in silence; presently he bent and kissed the old woman’s cheek; then he
got to his feet and saw his father.

“The _Chasseur Alpin_,” he merely said, picking up the letter and
handing it to Campton. “It was the grandson she counted on most.”

Mme. Lebel caught sight of Campton, smoothed herself and stood up also.

“I had found him a wife?a strong healthy girl with a good _dot_. There
go my last great-grandchildren! For the other will be killed too. I
don’t understand any more, do you?” She made an automatic attempt to
straighten the things on the table, but her hands beat the air and
George had to lead her downstairs.

It was that day that Campton said to himself: “We shan’t keep him in
Paris much longer.” But the heavy weeks of spring and summer passed, the
inconclusive conflict at the front went on with its daily toll of dead,
and George still stuck to his job. Campton, during this time, continued
to avoid the Brants as much as possible. His wife’s conversation was
intolerable to him; her obtuse optimism, now that she had got her son
back, was even harder to bear than the guiltily averted glance of Mr.
Brant, between whom and Campton their last talk had hung a lasting
shadow of complicity.

But most of all Campton dreaded to meet the Talketts; the wife with her
flushed cheek-bones and fixed eyes, the husband still affably and
continuously arguing against Philistinism. One afternoon the painter
stumbled on them, taking tea with George in Boylston’s little flat; but
he went away again, unable to bear the interminable discussion between
Talkett and Boylston, and the pacifist’s reiterated phrase: “To borrow
one of my wife’s expressions”?while George, with a closed brooding face,
sat silent, laughing drily now and then. What a different George from
the one his father had found, in silence also, kneeling beside Mme.
Lebel!

Once again Campton was vouchsafed a glimpse of that secret George. He
had walked back with his son after the funeral mass for young Lebel; and
in the porter’s lodge of the Avenue Marigny they found a soldier
waiting?a young square-built fellow, with a shock of straw-coloured hair
above his sunburnt rural face. Campton was turning from the door when
George dashed past him, caught the young man by both shoulders, and
shouted out his name. It was that of the orderly who had carried him out
of the firing-line and hunted him up the next day in the Doullens
hospital. Campton saw the look the two exchanged: it lasted only for the
taking of a breath; a moment later officer and soldier were laughing
like boys, and the orderly was being drawn forth to shake hands with
Campton. But again the glance was an illumination; it came straight from
that far country, the Benny Upsher country, which Campton so feared to
see in his son’s eyes.

The orderly had been visiting his family, fugitives from the invaded
regions who had taken shelter in one of Adele Anthony’s suburban
colonies. He had obtained permission to stop in Paris on his way back to
the front; and for two joyful days he was lodged and feasted in the
Avenue Marigny. Boylston provided him with an evening at Montmartre,
George and Mrs. Brant took him to the theatre and the cinema, and on the
last day of his leave Adele Anthony invited him to tea with Campton, Mr.
Brant and Boylston. Mr. Brant, as they left this entertainment, hung
back on the stairs to say in a whisper to Campton: “The family are
provided for?amply. I’ve asked George to mention the fact to the young
man; but not until just as he’s starting.”

Campton nodded. For George’s sake he was glad; yet he could not repress
a twinge of his dormant jealousy. Was it always to be Brant who thought
first of the things to make George happy?always Brant who would alone
have the power to carry them out?

“But he can’t prevent that poor fellow’s getting killed to-morrow,”
Campton thought almost savagely, as the young soldier beamed forth from
the taxi in which George was hurrying him to the station.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It was not many days afterward that George looked in at the studio early
one morning. Campton, over his breakfast, had been reading the
_communique_. There was heavy news from Verdun; from east to west the
air was dark with calamity; but George’s face had the look it had worn
when he greeted his orderly.

“Dad, I’m off,” he said; and sitting down at the table, he
unceremoniously poured himself some coffee into his father’s empty cup.

“The battalion’s been ordered back. I leave to-night. Let’s lunch
together somewhere presently, shall we?”

His eye was clear, his smile confident: a great weight seemed to have
fallen from him, and he looked like the little boy sitting up in bed
with his Lavengro. “After ten months of Paris??” he added, stretching
his arms over his head with a great yawn.

“Yes?the routine??” stammered Campton, not knowing what he said. Yet he
was glad too; yes, in his heart of hearts he knew he was glad; though,
as always happened, his emotion took him by the throat and silenced him.
But it did not matter, for George was talking.

“I shall have leave a good deal oftener nowadays,” he said with
animation. “And everything is ever so much better organized?letters and
all that. I shan’t seem so awfully far away. You’ll see.”

Campton still gazed at him, struggling for expression. Their hands met.
Campton said?or imagined he said: “I see?I do see, already??” though
afterward he was not even sure that he had spoken.

What he saw, with an almost blinding distinctness, was the extent to
which his own feeling, during the long months, had imperceptibly
changed, and how his inmost impulse, now that the blow had fallen, was
not of resistance to it, but of acquiescence, since it made him once
more one with his son.

He would have liked to tell that to George; but speech was impossible.
And perhaps, after all, it didn’t matter; it didn’t matter, because
George understood. Their hand-clasp had made that clear, and an hour or
two later they were lunching together almost gaily.

Boylston joined them, and the three went on together to say goodbye to
Adele Anthony. Adele, for once, was unprepared: it was almost a relief
to Campton, who had winced in advance at the thought of her warlike
attitude. The poor thing was far from warlike: her pale eyes clung to
George’s in a frightened stare, while her lips, a little stiffly,
repeated the stock phrases of good cheer. “Such a relief.... I
congratulate you ... getting out of all this _paperasserie_ and red
tape.... If I’d been you I couldn’t have stood Paris another minute....
The only hopeful people left are at the front....” It was the formula
that sped every departing soldier.

The day wore on. To Campton its hours seemed as interminable yet as
rapid as those before his son’s first departure, nearly two years
earlier. George had begged his father to come in the evening to the
Avenue Marigny, where he was dining with the Brants. It was easier for
Campton nowadays to fall in with such requests: during the months of
George’s sojourn in Paris a good many angles had had their edges rubbed
off.

Besides, at that moment he would have done anything for his son?his son
again at last! In their hand-clasp that morning the old George had come
back to him, simple, boyish, just as he used to be; and Campton’s dread
of the future was lightened by a great glow of pride.

In the Avenue Marigny dining-room the Brants and George were still
sitting together about the delicate silver and porcelain. There were no
flowers: Julia, always correct, had long since banished them as a
superfluity. But there was champagne for George’s farewell, and a
glimpse of rich fare being removed.

Mr. Brant rose to greet Campton. His concise features were drawn with
anxiety, and with the effort to hide it; but his wife appeared to
Campton curiously unperturbed, and the leave-taking was less painful and
uselessly drawn out than he had expected.

George and his father were to be sent to the station in Mr. Brant’s
motor. Campton, as he got in, remembered with a shiver the grey morning,
before daylight, when the same motor had stood at the studio door,
waiting to carry him to Doullens; between himself and his son he seemed
to see Mr. Brant’s small suffering profile.

To shake off the memory he said: “Your mother’s in wonderfully good
form. I was glad to see she wasn’t nervous.”

George laughed. “No. Madge met her this morning at the new
_clairvoyante’s_.?It does them all a lot of good,” he added, with his
all-embracing tolerance.

Campton shivered again. That universal smiling comprehension of George’s
always made him seem remoter than ever. “It makes him seem so old?a
thousand years older than I am.” But he forced an acquiescent laugh, and
presently George went on: “About Madge?you’ll be awfully good to her,
won’t you, if I get smashed?”

“My dear boy!”

There was another pause, and then Campton risked a question. “Just how
do things stand? I know so little, after all.”

For a moment George seemed to hesitate: his thick fair eyebrows were
drawn into a puzzled frown. “I know?I’ve never explained it to you
properly. I’ve tried to; but I was never sure that I could make you
see.” He paused and added quietly: “I know now that she’ll never divorce
Talkett.”

“You know???” Campton exclaimed with a great surge of relief.

“She thinks she will; but I see that the idea still frightens her. And
I’ve kept on using the divorce argument only as a pretext.”

The words thrust Campton back into new depths of perplexity. “A
pretext?” he echoed.

“My dear old Dad?don’t you guess? She’s come to care for me awfully; if
we’d gone all the lengths she wanted, and then I’d got killed, there
would have been nothing on earth left for her. I hadn’t the right, don’t
you see? We chaps haven’t any futures to dispose of till this job we’re
in is finished. Of course, if I come back, and she can make up her mind
to break with everything she’s used to, we shall marry; but if things go
wrong I’d rather leave her as she is, safe in her little old rut. So
many people can’t live out of one?and she’s one of them, poor child,
though she’s so positive she isn’t.”

Campton sat chilled and speechless as the motor whirled them on through
the hushed streets. It paralyzed his faculties to think that in a moment
more they would be at the station.

“It’s awfully fine: your idea,” he stammered at length.
“Awfully?magnanimous.” But he still felt the chill down his spine.

“Oh, it’s only that things look to us so different?so indescribably
different?and always will, I suppose, even after this business is over.
We seem to be sealed to it for life.”

“Poor girl?poor girl!” Campton thought within himself. Aloud he said:
“My dear chap, of course you can count on my being?my doing??”

“Of course, of course, old Dad.”

They were at the station. Father and son got out and walked toward the
train. Campton put both hands on George’s shoulders.

“Look here,” George broke out, “there’s one thing more. I want to tell
you that I know what a lot I owe to you and Adele. You’ve both been
awfully fine: did you know it? You two first made me feel a lot of
things I hadn’t felt before. And you know this _is_ my job; I’ve never
been surer of it than at this minute.”

They clasped hands in silence, each looking his fill of the other; then
the crowd closed in, George exclaimed: “My kit-bag!” and somehow, in the
confusion, the parting was over, and Campton, straining blurred eyes,
saw his son’s smile?the smile of the light-hearted lad of old days?flash
out at him from the moving train. For an instant the father had the
illusion that it was the goodbye look of the boy George, going back to
school after the holidays.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Campton, as he came out of the station, stumbled, to his surprise, on
Mr. Brant. The little man, as they met, flushed and paled, and sought
the customary support from his eye-glasses.

“I followed you in the other motor,” he said, looking away.

“Oh, I say??” Campton murmured; then, with an effort: “Shouldn’t you
like me to drive back with you?”

Mr. Brant shook his head. “Thank you. Thank you very much. But it’s late
and you’ll want to be getting home. I’ll be glad if you’ll use my car.”
Together they strolled slowly across the station court to the place
where the private motors waited; but there Campton held out his hand.

“Much obliged; I think I’ll walk.”

Mr. Brant nodded; then he said abruptly: “This _clairvoyante_ business:
is there anything in it, do you think? You saw how calm?er?Julia was
just now: she wished me to tell you that that Spanish woman she goes
to?her name is Olida, I think?had absolutely reassured her about ...
about the future. The woman says she knows that George will come back
soon, and never be sent to the front again. Those were the exact words,
I believe. _Never be sent to the front again._ Julia put every kind of
question, and couldn’t trip her up; she wanted me to tell you so. It
does sound...? Well, at any rate, it’s a help to the mothers.”




                                 XXXIV


The next morning Campton said to himself: “I can catch that goodbye look
if I get it down at once??” and pulled out a canvas before Mme. Lebel
came in with his coffee.

As sometimes happened to him, the violent emotions of the last
twenty-four hours had almost immediately been clarified and transmuted
into vision. He felt that he could think contentedly of George if he
could sit down at once and paint him.

The picture grew under his feverish fingers?feverish, yet how firm! He
always wondered anew at the way in which, at such hours, the inner flame
and smoke issued in a clear guiding radiance. He saw?he saw; and the
mere act of his seeing seemed to hold George safe in some pure
impenetrable medium. His boy was there, sitting to him, the old George
he knew and understood, essentially, vividly face to face with him.

He was interrupted by a ring. Mme. Lebel, tray in hand, opened the door,
and a swathed and voluminous figure, sweeping in on a wave of musk,
blotted her out. Campton, exasperated at the interruption, turned to
face Mme. Olida.

So remote were his thoughts that he would hardly have recognized her had
she not breathed, on the old familiar guttural: “Juanito!”

He was less surprised at her intrusion than annoyed at being torn from
his picture. “Didn’t you see a sign on the door? ‘No admission before
twelve’??” he growled.

“Oh, yes,” she said; “that’s how I knew you were in.”

“But I’m _not_ in; I’m working. I can’t allow??”

Her large bosom rose. “I know, my heart! I remember how stern you always
were. ‘Work?work?my work!’ It was always that, even in the first days.
But I come to you on my knees: Juanito, imagine me there!” She sketched
a plunging motion of her vast body, arrested it in time by supporting
herself on the table, and threw back her head entreatingly, so that
Campton caught a glint of the pearls in a crevasse of her quaking
throat. He saw that her eyes were red with weeping.

“What can I do? You’re in trouble?”

“Oh, such trouble, my heart?such trouble!” She leaned to him, absorbing
his hands in her plump muscular grasp. “I must have news of my son; I
must! The young man?you saw him that day you came with your wife? Yes?he
looked in at the door: beautiful as a god, was he not? That was my son
Pepito!” And with a deep breath of pride and anguish she unburdened
herself of her tale.

Two or three years after her parting with Campton she had married a
clever French barber from the Pyrenees. He had brought her to France,
and they had opened a “Beauty Shop” at Biarritz and had prospered.
Pepito was born there and soon afterward, alas, her clever husband,
declaring that he “hated grease in cooking or in woman” (“and after my
Pepito’s birth I became as you now see me”), had gone off with the
manicure and all their savings. Mme. Olida had had a struggle to bring
up her boy; but she had kept on with the Beauty Shop, had made a success
of it, and not long before the war had added fortune-telling to massage
and hair-dressing.

“And my son, Juanito; was not my son an advertisement for a Beauty Shop,
I ask you? Before he was out of petticoats he brought me customers;
before he was sixteen all the ladies who came to me were quarrelling
over him. Ah, there were moments when he crucified me ... but lately he
had grown more reasonable, had begun to see where his true interests
lay, and we had become friends again, friends and business partners.
When the war broke out I came to Paris; I knew that all the mothers
would want news of their sons. I have made a great deal of money; and I
have had wonderful results?wonderful! I could give you instances?names
that you know?where I have foretold everything! Oh, I have the gift, my
heart, I have it!”

She pressed his hands with a smile of triumph; then her face clouded
again.

“But six months ago my darling was called to his regiment?and for three
months now I’ve had no news of him, none, none!” she sobbed, the tears
making dark streaks through her purplish powder.

The upshot of it was that she had heard that Campton was “all-powerful”;
that he knew Ministers and Generals, knew great financiers like
Jorgenstein (who were so much more powerful than either Generals or
Ministers), and could, if he chose, help her to trace her boy, who, from
the day of his departure for the front, had vanished as utterly as if
the earth had swallowed him.

“Not a word, not a sign?to me, his mother, who have slaved and slaved
for him, who have made a fortune for him!”

Campton looked at her, marvelling. “But your gift as you call it ...
your powers ... you can’t use them for yourself?”

She returned his look with a tearful simplicity: she hardly seemed to
comprehend what he was saying. “But my son! I want _news_ of my son,
real news; I want a letter; I want to see some one who has seen him! To
touch a hand that has touched him! Oh, don’t you understand?”

“Yes, I understand,” he said; and she took up her desperate litany,
clinging about him with soft palms like medusa-lips, till by dint of
many promises he managed to detach himself and steer her gently to the
door.

On the threshold she turned to him once more. “And your own son,
Juanito?I know he’s at the front again. His mother came the other
day?she often comes. And I can promise you things if you’ll help me. No,
even if you don’t help me?for the old days’ sake, I will! I know secrets
... magical secrets that will protect him. There’s a Moorish salve,
infallible against bullets ... handed down from King Solomon ... I can
get it....”

Campton, guiding her across the sill, led her out and bolted the door on
her; then he went back to his easel and stood gazing at the sketch of
George. But the spell was broken: the old George was no longer there.
The war had sucked him back into its awful whirlpool?once more he was
that dark enigma, a son at the front....

                  *       *       *       *       *

In the heavy weeks which followed, a guarded allusion of Campton’s
showed him one day that Boylston was aware of there being “something
between” George and Madge Talkett.

“Not that he’s ever said anything?or even encouraged me to guess
anything. But she’s got a talking face, poor little thing; and not much
gift of restraint. And I suppose it’s fairly obvious to everybody?except
perhaps to Talkett?that she’s pretty hard hit.”

“Yes. And George?”

Boylston’s round face became remote and mysterious. “We don’t really
know?do we, sir??exactly how any of them feel? Any more than if they
were??” He drew up sharply on the word, but Campton faced it.

“Dead?”

“Transfigured, say; no, trans??what’s the word in the theology books? A
new substance ... somehow....”

“Ah, you feel that too?” the father exclaimed.

“Yes. They don’t know it themselves, though?how far they are from us. At
least I don’t think they do.”

Campton nodded. “But George, in the beginning, was?frankly indifferent
to the war, wasn’t he?”

“Yes; intellectually he was. But he told me that when he saw the first
men on their way back from the front?with the first mud on them?he knew
he belonged where they’d come from. I tried hard to persuade him when he
was here that his real job was on a military mission to America?and it
_was_. Think what he might have done out there! But it was no use. His
orderly’s visit did the trick. It’s the thought of their men that pulls
them all back. Look at Louis Dastrey?they couldn’t keep him in America.
There’s something in all their eyes: I don’t know what. _Dulce et
decorum_, perhaps??”

“Yes.”

There was a pause before Campton questioned: “And Talkett?”

“Poor little ass?I don’t know. He’s here arguing with me nearly every
day. She looks over his shoulder, and just shrugs at me with her
eyebrows.”

“Can you guess what she thinks of George’s attitude?”

“Oh, something different every day. I don’t believe she’s ever really
understood. But then she loves him, and nothing else counts.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Brant continued to face life with apparent serenity. She had
returned several times to Mme. Olida’s, and had always brought away the
same reassuring formula: she thought it striking, and so did her
friends, that the _clairvoyante’s_ prediction never varied.

There was reason to believe that George’s regiment had been sent to
Verdun, and from Verdun the news was growing daily more hopeful. This
seemed to Mrs. Brant a remarkable confirmation of Olida’s prophecy.
Apparently it did not occur to her that, in the matter of human life,
victories may be as ruinous as defeats; and she triumphed in the fact?it
had grown to be a fact to her?that her boy was at Verdun, when he might
have been in the Somme, where things, though stagnant, were on the whole
going less well. Mothers prayed for “a quiet sector”?and then, she
argued, what happened? The men grew careless, the officers were oftener
away; your son was ordered out to see to the repairs of a barbed wire
entanglement, and a sharpshooter picked him off while you were sitting
reading one of his letters, and thinking: “Thank God he’s out of the
fighting.” And besides, Olida was _sure_, and all her predictions had
been so wonderful....

Campton began to dread his wife’s discovering Mme. Olida’s fears for her
own son. Every endeavour to get news of Pepito had been fruitless;
finally Campton and Boylston concluded that the young man must be a
prisoner. The painter had a second visit from Mme. Olida, in the course
of which he besought her (without naming Julia) to be careful not to
betray her private anxiety to the poor women who came to her for
consolation; and she fixed her tortured velvet eyes on him
reproachfully.

“How could you think it of me, Juanito? The money I earn is for my boy!
That gives me the strength to invent a new lie every morning.”

He took her fraudulent hand and kissed it.

The next afternoon he met Mrs. Brant walking down the Champs Elysees
with her light girlish step. She lifted a radiant face to his. “A letter
from George this morning! And, do you know, Olida prophesied it? I was
there again yesterday; and she told me that he would soon be back, and
that at that very moment she could see him writing to me. You’ll admit
it’s extraordinary? So many mothers depend on her?I couldn’t live
without her. And her messages from her own son are so beautiful??”

“From her own son?”

“Yes: didn’t I tell you? He says such perfect things to her. And she
confessed to me, poor woman, that before the war he hadn’t always been
kind: he used to take her money, and behave badly. But now every day he
sends her a thought-message?such beautiful things! She says she wouldn’t
have the courage to keep us all up if it weren’t for the way that she’s
kept up by her boy. And now,” Julia added gaily, “I’m going to order the
cakes for my bridge-tea this afternoon. You know I promised Georgie I
wouldn’t give up my bridge-teas.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Now and then Campton returned to his latest portrait of his son; but in
spite of George’s frequent letters, in spite of the sudden drawing
together of father and son during their last moments at the station, the
vision of the boy George, the careless happy George who had ridiculed
the thought of war and pursued his millennial dreams of an enlightened
world?that vision was gone. Sometimes Campton fancied that the letters
themselves increased this effect of remoteness. They were necessarily
more guarded than the ones written, before George’s wounding, from an
imaginary H.Q.; but that did not wholly account for the difference.
Campton, in the last analysis, could only say that his vision of his boy
was never quite in focus. Either?as in the moment when George had
comforted Mme. Lebel, or greeted his orderly, or when he had said those
last few broken words at the station?he seemed nearer than ever, seemed
part and substance of his father; or else he became again that beautiful
distant apparition, the winged sentry guarding the Unknown.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The weeks thus punctuated by private anxieties rolled on dark with doom.
At last, in December, came the victory of Verdun. Men took it reverently
but soberly. The price paid had been too heavy for rejoicing; and the
horizon was too ominous in other quarters. Campton had hoped that the
New Year would bring his son back on leave; but still George did not
speak of coming. Meanwhile Boylston’s face grew rounder and more
beaming. At last America was stirring in her sleep. “Oh, if only George
were out there!” Boylston used to cry, as if his friend had been an
army. His faith in George’s powers of persuasion was almost mystical.
And not long afterward Campton had the surprise of a visit which seemed,
in the most unforeseen way, to confirm this belief. Returning to his
studio one afternoon he found it tenanted by Mr. Roger Talkett.

The young man, as carefully brushed and equipped as usual, but pale with
emotion, clutched the painter’s hand in a moist grasp.

“My dear Master, I had to see you?to see you alone and immediately.”

Campton looked at him with apprehension. What was the meaning of his
“alone”? Had Mrs. Talkett lost her head, and betrayed her secret?or had
she committed some act of imprudence of which the report had come back
to her husband?

“Do sit down,” said the painter weakly.

But his visitor, remaining sternly upright, shook his head and glanced
at his wrist-watch. “My moments,” he said, “are numbered?literally; all
I have time for is to implore you to look after my wife.” He drew a
handkerchief from his glossy cuff, and rubbed his eye-glasses.

“Your wife?” Campton echoed, dismayed.

“My dear sir, haven’t you guessed? It’s George’s wonderful example ...
his inspiration ... I’ve been converted! We men of culture can’t stand
by while the ignorant and illiterate are left to die for us. We must
leave that attitude to the Barbarian. Our duty is to set an example. I’m
off to-night for America?for Plattsburg.”

“Oh??” gasped Campton, wringing his hand.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Boylston burst into the studio the next day. “What did I tell you, sir?
George’s influence?it wakes up everybody. But Talkett?I’ll be hanged if
I should have thought it! And have you seen his wife? She’s a
war-goddess! I went to the station with them: their farewells were
harrowing. At that minute, you know, I believe she’d forgotten that
George ever existed!”

“Well, thank God for that,” Campton cried.

“Yes. Don’t you feel how we’re all being swept into it?” panted Boylston
breathlessly. His face had caught the illumination. “Sealed, as George
says?we’re sealed to the job, every one of us! Even I feel that, sitting
here at a stuffy desk....” He flushed crimson and his eyes filled.
“We’ll be in it, you know; America will?in a few weeks now, I believe!
George was as sure of it as I am. And, of course, if the war goes on,
our army will have to take short-sighted officers; won’t they, sir? As
England and France did from the first. They’ll need the men; they’ll
need us all, sir!”

“They’ll need _you_, my dear chap; and they’ll have you, to the full,
whatever your job is,” Campton smiled; and Boylston, choking back a sob,
dashed off again.

Yes, they were all being swept into it together?swept into the yawning
whirlpool. Campton felt that as clearly as all these young men; he felt
the triviality, the utter unimportance, of all their personal and
private concerns, compared with this great headlong outpouring of life
on the altar of conviction. And he understood why, for youths like
George and Boylston, nothing, however close and personal to them, would
matter till the job was over. “And not even for poor Talkett!” he
reflected whimsically.

That afternoon, curiously appeased, he returned once more to his picture
of his son. He had sketched the boy leaning out of the train window,
smiling back, signalling, saying goodbye, while his destiny rushed him
out into darkness as years ago the train used to rush him back to
school. And while Campton worked he caught the glow again; it rested on
brow and eyes, and spread in sure touches under his happy brush.

One day, as the picture progressed, he wavered over the remembrance of
some little detail of the face, and went in search of an old portfolio
into which, from time to time, he had been in the habit of thrusting his
unfinished studies of George. He plunged his hand into the heap, and
Georges of all ages looked forth at him: round baby-Georges, freckled
schoolboys, a thoughtful long-faced youth (the delicate George of St.
Moritz); but none seemed quite to serve his purpose and he rummaged on
till he came to a page torn from an old sketch-book. It was the pencil
study he had made of George as the lad lay asleep at the Crillon, the
night before his mobilisation.

Campton threw the sketch down on the table; and as he sat staring at it
he relived every phase of the emotion out of which it had been born. How
little he had known then?how little he had understood! He could bear to
look at the drawing now; could bear even to rethink the shuddering
thoughts with which he had once flung it away from him. Was it only
because the atmosphere was filled with a growing sense of hope? Because,
in spite of everything, the victory of Verdun was there to show the
inexhaustible strength of France, because people were more and more sure
that America was beginning to waken ... or just because, after too long
and fierce a strain, human nature always instinctively contrives to get
its necessary whiff of moral oxygen? Or was it that George’s influence
had really penetrated him, and that this strange renewed confidence in
life and in ideals was his son’s message of reassurance?

Certainly the old George was there, close to him, that morning; and
somewhere else?in scenes how different?he was sure that the actual
George, at that very moment, was giving out force and youth and hope to
those about him.

“I couldn’t be doing this if I didn’t understand?at last,” Campton
thought as he turned back to the easel. The little pencil sketch had
given him just the hint he needed, and he took up his palette with a
happy sigh.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A knock broke in on his rapt labour, and without turning he called out:
“Damn it, who are you? Can’t you read the sign? _Not in!_”

The door opened and Mr. Brant entered.

He appeared not to have heard the painter’s challenge; his eyes, from
the threshold, sprang straight to the portrait, and remained vacantly
fastened there. Campton, long afterward, remembered thinking, as he
followed the glance: “He’ll be trying to buy this one too!”

Mr. Brant moistened his lips, and his gaze, detaching itself from
George’s face, moved back in the same vacant way to Campton’s. The two
men looked at each other, and Campton jumped to his feet.

“Not?not???”

Mr. Brant tried to speak, and the useless effort contracted his mouth in
a pitiful grimace.

“_My son?_” Campton shrieked, catching him by the arm. The little man
dropped into a chair.

“Not dead ... not dead.... Hope ... hope ...” was shaken out of him in
jerks of anguish.

The door burst open again, and Boylston dashed in beaming. He waved
aloft a handful of morning papers.

“America! You’ve seen? They’ve sacked Bernstorff! Broken off
diplomatic??”

His face turned white, and he stood staring incredulously from one of
the two bowed men to the other.




                                  XXXV


Campton once more stood leaning in the window of a Paris hospital.

Before him, but viewed at another angle, was spread that same great
spectacle of the Place de la Concorde that he had looked down at from
the Crillon on the eve of mobilisation; behind him, in a fresh white
bed, George lay in the same attitude as when his father had stood in the
door of his room and sketched him while he slept.

All day there had run through Campton’s mind the _clairvoyante’s_
promise to Julia: “Your son will come back soon, and will never be sent
to the front again.”

Ah, this time it was true?never, never would he be sent to the front
again! They had him fast now, had him safe. That was the one certainty.
Fast how, safe how??the answer to that had long hung in the balance. For
two weeks or more after his return the surgeons had hesitated. Then
youth had seemed to conquer, and the parents had been told to hope that
after a long period of immobility George’s shattered frame would slowly
re-knit, and he would walk again?or at least hobble. A month had gone by
since then; and Campton could at last trust himself to cast his mind
back over the intervening days, so like in their anguish to those at
Doullens, yet so different in all that material aid and organization
could give.

Evacuation from the base, now so systematically and promptly effected,
had become a matter of course in all but the gravest cases; and even the
delicate undertaking of deflecting George’s course from the hospital
near the front to which he had been destined, and bringing him to Paris,
had been accomplished by a word in the right quarter from Mr. Brant.

Campton, from the first, had been opposed to the attempt to bring George
to Paris; partly perhaps because he felt that in the quiet provincial
hospital near the front he would be able to have his son to himself. At
any rate, the journey would have been shorter; though, as against that,
Paris offered more possibilities of surgical aid. His opposition had
been violent enough to check his growing friendliness with the Brants;
and at the hours when they came to see George, Campton now most often
contrived to be absent. Well, at any rate, George was alive, he was
there under his father’s eye, he was going to live: there seemed to be
no doubt about it now. Campton could think it all over slowly and even
calmly, marvelling at the miracle and taking it in.... So at least he
had imagined till he first made the attempt; then the old sense of
unreality enveloped him again, and he struggled vainly to clutch at
something tangible amid the swimming mists. “George?George?George??” He
used to say the name over and over below his breath, as he sat and
watched at his son’s bedside; but it sounded far off and hollow, like
the voice of a ghost calling to another.

Who was “George”? What did the name represent? The father left his post
in the window and turned back to the bed, once more searching the boy’s
face for enlightenment. But George’s eyes were closed: sleep lay on him
like an impenetrable veil. The sleep of ordinary men was not like that:
the light of their daily habits continued to shine through the chinks of
their closed faces. But with these others, these who had been down into
the lower circles of the pit, it was different: sleep instantly and
completely sucked them back into the unknown. There were times when
Campton, thus watching beside his son, used to say to himself: “If he
were dead he could not be farther from me”?so deeply did George seem
plunged in secret traffic with things unutterable.

Now and then Campton, sitting beside him, seemed to see a little way
into those darknesses; but after a moment he always shuddered back to
daylight, benumbed, inadequate, weighed down with the weakness of the
flesh and the incapacity to reach beyond his habitual limit of
sensation. “No wonder they don’t talk to us,” he mused.

By-and-bye, perhaps, when George was well again, and the war over, the
father might penetrate into his son’s mind, and find some new ground of
communion with him: now the thing was not to be conceived.

He recalled again Adele Anthony’s asking him, when he had come back from
Doullens: “What was the first thing you felt?” and his answering:
“Nothing.”... Well, it was like that now: every vibration had ceased in
him. Between himself and George lay the unbridgeable abyss of his son’s
experiences.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As he sat there, the door was softly opened a few inches and Boylston’s
face showed through the crack: light shot from it like the rays around a
chalice. At a sign from him Campton slipped out into the corridor and
Boylston silently pushed a newspaper into his grasp. He bent over it,
trying with dazzled eyes to read sense into the staring head-lines: but
“America?America?America??” was all that he could see.

A nurse came gliding up on light feet: the tears were running down her
face. “Yes?I know, I know, I know!” she exulted. Up the tall stairs and
through the ramifying of long white passages rose an unwonted rumour of
sound, checked, subdued, invisibly rebuked, but ever again breaking out,
like the noise of ripples on a windless beach. In every direction nurses
and orderlies were speeding from one room to another of the house of
pain with the message: “America has declared war on Germany.”

Campton and Boylston stole back into George’s room. George lifted his
eyelids and smiled at them, understanding before they spoke.

“The sixth of April! Remember the date!” Boylston cried over him in a
gleeful whisper.

The wounded man, held fast in his splints, contrived to raise his head a
little. His eyes laughed back into Boylston’s. “You’ll be in uniform
within a week!” he said; and Boylston crimsoned.

Campton turned away again to the window. The day had come?had come; and
his son had lived to see it. So many of George’s comrades had gone down
to death without hope; and in a few months more George, leaning from
that same window?or perhaps well enough to be watching the spectacle
with his father from the terrace of the Tuileries?would look out on the
first brown battalions marching across the Place de la Concorde, where
father and son, in the early days of the war, had seen the young
recruits of the Foreign Legion patrolling under improvised flags.

At the thought Campton felt a loosening of the tightness about his
heart. Something which had been confused and uncertain in his relation
to the whole long anguish was abruptly lifted, giving him the same sense
of buoyancy that danced in Boylston’s glance. At last, random atoms that
they were, they seemed all to have been shaken into their places,
pressed into the huge mysterious design which was slowly curving a new
firmament over a new earth....

There was another knock; and a jubilant nurse appeared, hardly visible
above a great bunch of lilacs tied with a starred and striped ribbon.
Campton, as he passed the flowers over to his son, noticed an envelope
with Mrs. Talkett’s perpendicular scrawl. George lay smiling, the lilacs
close to his pillow, his free hand fingering the envelope; but he did
not unseal the letter, and seemed to care less than ever to talk.

After an interval the door opened again, this time to show Mr. Brant’s
guarded face. He drew back slightly at the sight of Campton; but
Boylston, jumping up, passed close to the painter to breathe: “To-day,
sir, just to-day?you must!”

Campton went to the door and signed silently to Mr. Brant to enter.
Julia Brant stood outside, flushed and tearful, carrying as many orchids
as Mrs. Talkett had sent lilacs. Campton held out his hand, and with an
embarrassed haste she stammered: “We couldn’t wait??” Behind her he saw
Adele Anthony hurriedly coming up the stairs.

For a few minutes they all stood or sat about George’s bed, while their
voices, beginning to speak low, rose uncontrollably, interrupting one
another with tears and laughter. Mr. Brant and Boylston were both
brimming with news, and George, though he listened more than he spoke,
now and then put a brief question which loosened fresh floods. Suddenly
Campton noticed that the young man’s face, which had been too flushed,
grew pale; but he continued to smile, and his eyes to move responsively
from one illuminated face to the other. Campton, seeing that the others
meant to linger, presently rose and slipping out quietly walked across
the Rue de Rivoli to the deserted terrace of the Tuileries. There he sat
for a long time, looking out on the vast glittering spaces of the Place
de la Concorde, and calling up, with his painter’s faculty of vivid and
precise visualization, a future vision of interminable lines of brown
battalions marching past.

When he returned to the hospital after dinner the night-nurse met him.
She was not quite as well satisfied with her patient that evening:
hadn’t he perhaps had too many visitors? Yes, of course?she knew it had
been a great day, a day of international rejoicing, above all a blessed
day for France. But the doctors, from the beginning, must have warned
Mr. Campton that his son ought to be kept quiet-very quiet. The last
operation had been a great strain on his heart. Yes, certainly, Mr.
Campton might go in; the patient had asked for him. Oh, there was no
danger?no need for anxiety; only he must not stay too long; his son must
try to sleep.

Campton nodded, and stole in.

George lay motionless in the shaded lamplight: his eyes were open, but
they seemed to reflect his father’s presence without any change of
expression, like mirrors rather than like eyes. The room was doubly
silent after the joyful hubbub of the afternoon. The nurse had put the
orchids and lilacs where George’s eyes could rest on them. But was it on
the flowers that his gaze so tranquilly dwelt? Or did he see in their
place the faces of their senders? Or was he again in that far country
whither no other eyes could follow him?

Campton took his usual seat by the bed. Father and son looked at each
other, and the old George glanced out for half a second between the
wounded man’s lids.

“There was too much talking to-day,” Campton grumbled.

“Was there? I didn’t notice,” his son smiled.

No?he hadn’t noticed; he didn’t notice anything. He was a million miles
away again, whirling into his place in the awful pattern of that new
firmament....

“Tired, old man?” Campton asked under his breath.

“No; just glad,” said George contentedly.

His father laid a hand on his and sat silently beside him while the
spring night blew in upon them through the open window. The quiet
streets grew quieter, the hush in their hearts seemed gradually to steal
over the extinguished city. Campton kept saying to himself: “I must be
off,” and still not moving. The nurse was sure to come back
presently?why should he not wait till she dismissed him?

After a while, seeing that George’s eyes had closed, Campton rose, and
crept across the room to darken the lamp with a newspaper. His movement
must have roused his son, for he heard a slight struggle behind him and
the low cry: “Father!”

Campton turned and reached the bed in a stride. George, ashy-white, had
managed to lift himself a little on his free elbow.

“Anything wrong?” the father cried.

“No; everything all right,” George said. He dropped back, his lids
closing again, and a single twitch ran through the hand that Campton had
seized. After that he lay stiller than ever.




                                 XXXVI


George’s prediction had come true. At his funeral, three days afterward,
Boylston, a new-fledged member of the American Military Mission, was
already in uniform....

But through what perversity of attention did the fact strike Campton, as
he stood, a blank unfeeling automaton, in the front pew behind that
coffin draped with flags and flanked with candle-glitter? Why did one
thing rather than another reach to his deadened brain, and mostly the
trivial things, such as Boylston’s being already in uniform, and poor
Julia’s nose, under the harsh crape, looking so blue-red without its
powder, and the chaplain’s asking “O grave, where is thy victory?” in
the querulous tone of a schoolmaster reproaching a pupil who mislaid
things? It was always so with Campton: when sorrow fell it left him
insensible and dumb. Not till long afterward did he begin to feel its
birth-pangs....

                  *       *       *       *       *

They first came to him, those pangs, on a morning of the following July,
as he sat once more on the terrace of the Tuileries. Most of his time,
during the months since George’s death, had been spent in endless
aimless wanderings up and down the streets of Paris: and that day,
descending early from Montmartre, he had noticed in his listless way
that all the buildings on his way were fluttering with American flags.
The fact left him indifferent: Paris was always decorating nowadays for
one ally or another. Then he remembered that it must be the Fourth of
July; but the idea of the Fourth of July came to him, through the same
haze of indifference, as a mere far-off childish memory of surreptitious
explosions and burnt fingers. He strolled on toward the Tuileries, where
he had got into the way of sitting for hours at a time, looking across
the square at what had once been George’s window.

He was surprised to find the Rue de Rivoli packed with people; but his
only thought was the instinctive one of turning away to avoid them, and
he began to retrace his steps in the direction of the Louvre. Then at a
corner he paused again and looked back at the Place de la Concorde. It
was not curiosity that drew him, heaven knew?he would never again be
curious about anything?but he suddenly remembered the day three months
earlier when, leaning from George’s window in the hospital, he had said
to himself “By the time our first regiments arrive he’ll be up and
looking at them from here, or sitting with me over there on the
terrace”; and that decided him to turn back. It was as if he had felt
the pressure of George’s hand on his arm.

Though it was still so early he had some difficulty in pushing his way
through the throng. No seats were left on the terrace, but he managed to
squeeze into a corner near one of the great vases of the balustrade; and
leaning there, with the happy hubbub about him, he watched and waited.

Such a summer morning it was?and such a strange grave beauty had fallen
on the place! He seemed to understand for the first time?he who had
served Beauty all his days?how profoundly, at certain hours, it may
become the symbol of things hoped for and things died for. All those
stately spaces and raying distances, witnesses of so many memorable
scenes, might have been called together just as the setting for this one
event?the sight of a few brown battalions passing over them like a
feeble trail of insects.

Campton, with a vague awakening of interest, glanced about him, studying
the faces of the crowd. Old and young, infirm and healthy, civilians and
soldiers?ah, the soldiers!?all were exultant, confident, alive. Alive!
The word meant something new to him now?something so strange and
unnatural that his mind still hung and brooded over it. For now that
George was dead, by what mere blind propulsion did all these thousands
of human beings keep on mechanically living?

He became aware that a boy, leaning over intervening shoulders, was
trying to push a folded paper into his hand. On it was pencilled, in Mr.
Brant’s writing: “There will be a long time to wait. Will you take the
seat I have kept next to mine?” Campton glanced down the terrace, saw
where the little man sat at its farther end, and shook his head. Then
some contradictory impulse made him decide to get up, laboriously work
his halting frame through the crowd, and insert himself into the place
next to Mr. Brant. The two men nodded without shaking hands; after that
they sat silent, their eyes on the empty square. Campton noticed that
Mr. Brant wore his usual gray clothes, but with a mourning band on the
left sleeve. The sight of that little band irritated Campton....

There was, as Mr. Brant had predicted, a long interval of waiting; but
at length a murmur of jubilation rose far off, and gathering depth and
volume came bellowing and spraying up to where they sat. The square, the
Champs Elysees and all the leafy distances were flooded with it: it was
as though the voice of Paris had sprung up in fountains out of her
stones. Then a military march broke shrilly on the tumult; and there
they came at last, in a scant swaying line?so few, so new, so raw; so
little, in comparison with the immense assemblages familiar to the
place, so much in meaning and in promise.

“How badly they march?there hasn’t even been time to drill them
properly!” Campton thought; and at the thought he felt a choking in his
throat, and his sorrow burst up in him in healing springs....

                  *       *       *       *       *

It was after that day that he first went back to his work. He had not
touched paint or pencil since George’s death; now he felt the
inspiration and the power returning, and he began to spend his days
among the young American officers and soldiers, studying them, talking
to them, going about with them, and then hurrying home to jot down his
impressions. He had not, as yet, looked at his last study of George, or
opened the portfolio with the old sketches; if any one had asked him, he
would probably have said that they no longer interested him. His whole
creative faculty was curiously, mysteriously engrossed in the recording
of the young faces for whose coming George had yearned.

“It’s their marching so badly?it’s their not even having had time to be
drilled!” he said to Boylston, half-shamefacedly, as they sat together
one August evening in the studio window.

Campton seldom saw Boylston nowadays. All the young man’s time was taken
up by his job with the understaffed and inexperienced Military Mission;
but fagged as he was by continual overwork and heavy responsibilities,
his blinking eyes had at last lost their unsatisfied look, and his whole
busy person radiated hope and encouragement.

On the day in question he had turned up unexpectedly, inviting himself
to dine with Campton and smoke a cigar afterward in the quiet window
overhanging Paris. Campton was glad to have him there; no one could tell
him more than Boylston about the American soldiers, their numbers, the
accommodations prepared for their reception, their first contact with
the other belligerents, and their own view of the business they were
about. And the two chatted quietly in the twilight till the young man,
rising, said it was time to be off.

“Back to your shop?”

“Rather! There’s a night’s work ahead. But I’m as good as new after our
talk.”

Campton looked at him wistfully. “You know I’d like to paint you some
day.”

“Oh??” cried Boylston, suffused with blushes; and added with a laugh:
“It’s my uniform, not me.”

“Well, your uniform _is_ you?it’s all of you young men.”

Boylston stood in the window twisting his cap about undecidedly. “Look
here, sir?now that you’ve got back to work again??”

“Well?” Campton interrupted suspiciously.

The young man cleared his throat and spoke with a rush. “His mother
wants most awfully that something should be decided about the monument.”

“Monument? What monument? I don’t want my son to have a monument,”
Campton exploded.

But Boylston stuck to his point. “It’ll break her heart if something
isn’t put on the grave before long. It’s five months now?and they fully
recognize your right to decide??”

“Damn what they recognize! It was they who brought him to Paris; they
made him travel when he wasn’t fit; they killed him.”

“Well?supposing they did: judge how much more they must be suffering!”

“Let ’em suffer. He’s my son?my son. He isn’t Brant’s.”

“Miss Anthony thinks??”

“And he’s not hers either, that I know of!”

Boylston seemed to hesitate. “Well, that’s just it, isn’t it, sir?
You’ve had him; you have him still. Nobody can touch that fact, or take
it from you. Every hour of his life was yours. But they’ve never had
anything, those two others, Mr. Brant and Miss Anthony; nothing but a
reflected light. And so every outward sign means more to them. I’m
putting it badly, I know??”

Campton held out his hand. “You don’t mean to, I suppose. But better not
put it at all. Good night,” he said. And on the threshold he called out
sardonically: “And who’s going to pay for a monument, I’d like to know?”

                  *       *       *       *       *

A monument?they wanted a monument! Wanted him to decide about it, plan
it, perhaps design it?good Lord, he didn’t know! No doubt it all seemed
simple enough to them: anything did, that money could buy.... When he
couldn’t yet bear to turn that last canvas out from the wall, or look
into the old portfolio even.... Suffering, suffering! What did they any
of them know about suffering? Going over old photographs, comparing
studies, recalling scenes and sayings, discussing with some sculptor or
other the shape of George’s eyelids, the spring of his chest-muscles,
the way his hair grew and his hands moved?why, it was like digging him
up again out of that peaceful corner of the Neuilly cemetery where at
last he was resting, like dragging him back to the fret and the fever,
and the senseless roar of the guns that still went on.

And then: as he’d said to Boylston, who was to pay for their monument?
Even if the making of it had struck him as a way of getting nearer to
his boy, instead of building up a marble wall between them?even if the
idea had appealed to him, he hadn’t a penny to spare for such an
undertaking. In the first place, he never intended to paint again for
money; never intended to do anything but these gaunt and serious or
round and babyish young American faces above their stiff military
collars, and when their portraits were finished to put them away, locked
up for his own pleasure; and what he had earned in the last years was to
be partly for these young men?for their reading-rooms, clubs, recreation
centres, whatever was likely to give them temporary rest and solace in
the grim months to come; and partly for such of the proteges of “The
Friends of French Art” as had been deprived of aid under the new
management. Tales of private jealousy and petty retaliation came to
Campton daily, now that Mme. Beausite administered the funds; Adele
Anthony and Mlle. Davril, bursting with the wrongs of their pensioners,
were always appealing to him for help. And then, hidden behind these
more or less valid reasons, the old instinctive dread of spending had
reasserted itself, he couldn’t tell how or why, unless through some dim
opposition to the Brants’ perpetual outpouring: their hospitals, their
motors, their bribes, their orchids, and now their monument?_their_
monument!

He sought refuge from it all with his soldiers, haunting for hours every
day one of the newly-opened Soldiers’ and Sailors’ Clubs. Adele Anthony
had already found a job there, and was making a success of it. She
looked twenty years older since George was gone, but she stuck to her
work with the same humorous pertinacity; and with her mingled heartiness
and ceremony, her funny resuscitation of obsolete American slang, and
her ability to answer all their most disconcerting questions about Paris
and France (Montmartre included), she easily eclipsed the ministering
angels who twanged the home-town chord and called them “boys.”

The young men appeared to return Campton’s liking; it was as if they had
guessed that he needed them, and wanted to offer him their shy help. He
was conscious of something rather protecting in their attitude, of his
being to them a vague unidentified figure, merely “the old gentleman”
who was friendly to them; but he didn’t mind. It was enough to sit and
listen to their talk, to try and clear up a few of the countless puzzles
which confronted them, to render them such fatherly services as he
could, and in the interval to jot down notes of their faces?their
inexhaustibly inspiring faces. Sometimes to talk with them was like
being on the floor in George’s nursery, among the blocks and the tin
soldiers; sometimes like walking with young archangels in a cool empty
heaven; but wherever he was he always had the sense of being among his
own, the sense he had never had since George’s death.

To think of them all as George’s brothers, to study out the secret
likeness to him in their young dedicated faces: that was now his one
passion, his sustaining task; it was at such times that his son came
back and sat among them....

Gradually, as the weeks passed, the first of his new friends, officers
and soldiers, were dispersed throughout the training camps, and new
faces succeeded to those he had tried to fix on his canvas; an endless
line of Benny Upshers, baby-Georges, schoolboy Boylstons, they seemed to
be. Campton saw each one go with a fresh pang, knowing that every move
brought them so much nearer to the front, that ever-ravening and
inexorable front. They were always happy to be gone; and that only
increased his pain. Now and then he attached himself more particularly
to one of the young men, because of some look of the eyes or some turn
of the mind like George’s; and then the parting became anguish.

One day a second lieutenant came to the studio to take leave. He had
been an early recruit of Plattsburg, and his military training was so
far advanced that he counted on being among the first officers sent to
the fighting line. He was a fresh-coloured lad, with fair hair that
stood up in a defiant crest.

“There are so few of us, and there’s so little time to lose; they can’t
afford to be too particular,” he laughed.

It was just the sort of thing that George would have said, and the laugh
was like an echo of George’s. At the sound Campton suddenly burst into
tears, and was aware of his visitor’s looking at him with eyes of dismay
and compassion.

“Oh, don’t, sir, _don’t_,” the young man pleaded, wringing the painter’s
hand, and making what decent haste he could to get out of the studio.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Campton, left alone, turned once more to his easel. He sat down before a
canvas on which he had blocked out a group of soldiers playing cards at
their club; but after a stroke or two he threw aside his brush, and
remained with his head bowed on his hands, a lonely tired old man.

He had kept a cheerful front at his son’s going; and now he could not
say goodbye to one of these young fellows without crying. Well?it was
because he had no one left of his own, he supposed. Loneliness like his
took all a man’s strength from him....

The bell rang, but he did not move. It rang again; then the door was
pushed timidly open, and Mrs. Talkett came in. He had not seen her since
the day of George’s funeral, when he had fancied he detected her in a
shrunken black-veiled figure hurrying past in the meaningless line of
mourners.

In her usual abrupt fashion she began, without a greeting: “I’ve come to
say goodbye; I’m going to America.”

He looked at her remotely, hardly hearing what she said. “To America?”

“Yes; to join my husband.”

He continued to consider her in silence, and she frowned in her
perplexed and fretful way. “He’s at Plattsburg, you know.” Her eyes
wandered unseeingly about the studio. “There’s nothing else to do, is
there?now?here or anywhere? So I sail to-morrow; I mean to take a house
somewhere near him. He’s not well, and he writes that he misses me. The
life in camp is so unsuited to him??”

Campton still listened absently. “Oh, you’re right to go,” he agreed at
length, supposing it was what she expected of him.

“Am I?” She half-smiled. “What’s right and what’s wrong? I don’t know
any longer. I’m only trying to do what I suppose George would have
wanted.” She stood uncertainly in front of Campton. “All I _do_ know,”
she cried, with a sharp break in her voice, “is that I’ve never in my
life been happy enough to be so unhappy!” And she threw herself down on
the divan in a storm of desolate sobbing.

After he had comforted her as best he could, and she had gone away,
Campton continued to wander up and down the studio forlornly. That cry
of hers kept on echoing in his ears: “I’ve never in my life been happy
enough to be so unhappy!” It associated itself suddenly with a phrase of
Boylston’s that he had brushed away unheeding: “You’ve had your son?you
have him still; but those others have never had anything.”

Yes; Campton saw now that it was true of poor Madge Talkett, as it was
of Adele Anthony and Mr. Brant, and even in a measure of Julia. They had
never?no, not even George’s mother?had anything, in the close
inextricable sense in which Campton had had his son. And it was only
now, in his own hour of destitution, that he understood how much greater
the depth of their poverty had been. He recalled the frightened
embarrassed look of the young lieutenant whom he had discountenanced by
his tears; and he said to himself: “The only thing that helps is to be
able to do things for people. I suppose that’s why Brant’s always
trying??”

Julia too: it was strange that his thoughts should turn to her with such
peculiar pity. It was not because the boy had been born of her body:
Campton did not see her now, as he once had in a brief moment of
compassion, as the young mother bending illumined above her baby. He saw
her as an old empty-hearted woman, and asked himself how such an
unmanageable monster as grief was to fill the room up of her absent son.

What did such people as Julia do with grief, he wondered, how did they
make room for it in their lives, get up and lie down every day with its
taste on their lips? Its elemental quality, that awful sense it
communicated of a whirling earth, a crumbling Time, and all the cold
stellar spaces yawning to receive us?these feelings which he was
beginning to discern and to come to terms with in his own way (and with
the sense that it would have been George’s way too), these feelings
could never give their stern appeasement to Julia.... Her religion? Yes,
such as it was no doubt it would help; talking with the Rector would
help; giving more time to her church-charities, her wounded soldiers,
imagining that she was paying some kind of tax on her affliction. But
the vacant evenings, at home, face to face with Brant! Campton had long
since seen that the one thing which had held the two together was their
shared love of George; and if Julia discovered, as she could hardly fail
to do, how much more deeply Brant had loved her son than she had, and
how much more inconsolably he mourned him, that would only increase her
sense of isolation. And so, in sheer self-defence, she would gradually,
stealthily, fill up the void with the old occupations, with bridge and
visits and secret consultations at the dressmaker’s about the width of
crape on her dresses; and all the while the object of life would be gone
for her. Yes; he pitied Julia most of all.

But Mr. Brant too?perhaps in a different way it was he who suffered
most. For the stellar spaces were not exactly Mr. Brant’s native
climate, and yet voices would call to him from them, and he would not
know....

There were moments when Campton looked about him with astonishment at
the richness of his own denuded life; when George was in the sunset, in
the voices of young people, or in any trivial joke that father and son
would have shared; and other moments when he was nowhere, utterly lost,
extinct and irrecoverable; and others again when the one thing which
could have vitalized the dead business of living would have been to see
him shove open the studio door, stalk in, pour out some coffee for
himself in his father’s cup, and diffuse through the air the warm sense
of his bodily presence, the fresh smell of his clothes and his flesh and
his hair. But through all these moods, Campton began to see, there ran
the life-giving power of a reality embraced and accepted. George had
been; George was; as long as his father’s consciousness lasted, George
would be as much a part of it as the closest, most actual of his
immediate sensations. He had missed nothing of George, and here was his
harvest, his golden harvest.

Such states of mind were not constant with Campton; but more and more
often, when they came, they swept him on eagle wings over the next
desert to the next oasis; and so, gradually, the meaningless days became
linked to each other in some kind of intelligible sequence.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Boylston, after the talk which had so agitated Campton, did not turn up
again at the studio for some time; but when he next appeared the
painter, hardly pausing to greet him, began at once, as if they had just
parted: “That monument you spoke about the other day ... you know....”

Boylston glanced at him in surprise.

“If they want me to do it, I’ll do it,” Campton went on, jerking the
words out abruptly and walking away toward the window. He had not known,
till he began, that he had meant to utter them, or how difficult they
would be to say; and he stood there a moment struggling with the
unreasoning rebellious irritability which so often lay in wait for his
better impulses. At length he turned back, his hands in his pockets,
clinking his change as he had done the first time that Boylston had come
to him for help. “But as I plan the thing,” he began again, in a queer
growling tone, “it’s going to cost a lot?everything of the sort does
nowadays, especially in marble. It’s hard enough to get any one to do
that kind of work at all. And prices have about tripled, you know.”

Boylston’s eyes filled, and he nodded, still without speaking.

“That’s just what Brant’ll like though, isn’t it?” Campton said, with an
irrepressible sneer in his voice. He saw Boylston redden and look away,
and he too flushed to the forehead and broke off ashamed. Suddenly he
had the vision of Mr. Brant effacing himself at the foot of the hospital
stairs when they had arrived at Doullens; Mr. Brant drawing forth the
copy of the orderly’s letter in the dark fog-swept cloister; Mr. Brant
always yielding, always holding back, yet always remembering to do or to
say the one thing the father’s lacerated soul could bear.

“And he’s had nothing?nothing?nothing!” Campton thought.

He turned again to Boylston, his face still flushed, his lips twitching.
“Tell them?tell Brant?that I’ll design the thing; I’ll design it, and he
shall pay for it. He’ll want to?I understand that. Only, for God’s sake,
don’t let him come here and thank me?at least not for a long time!”

Boylston again nodded silently, and turned to go.

After he had gone the painter moved back to his long table. He had
always had a fancy for modelling?had always had lumps of clay lying
about within reach. He pulled out all the sketches of his son from the
old portfolio, spread them before him on the table, and began.

 PARIS, 1918?Saint Brice-Sous-Foret, 1922.


                                THE END

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. P. 62, changed “we was surprised” to “he was surprised”.
 2. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 3. Retained anachronistic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as
      printed.
 4. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 5. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Son at the Front, by Edith Wharton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SON AT THE FRONT ***

***** This file should be named 59437-0.txt or 59437-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/4/3/59437/

Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Son at the Front, by Edith Wharton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: A Son at the Front

Author: Edith Wharton

Release Date: May 5, 2019 [EBook #59437]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SON AT THE FRONT ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









 _BY EDITH WHARTON_


 A SON AT THE FRONT
 THE GREATER INCLINATION
 THE TOUCHSTONE
 CRUCIAL INSTANCES
 THE VALLEY OF DECISION
 SANCTUARY
 THE DESCENT OF MAN
 THE HOUSE OF MIRTH
 THE FRUIT OF THE TREE
 THE HERMIT AND THE WILD WOMAN
 TALES OF MEN AND GHOSTS
 ETHAN FROME
 THE CUSTOM OF THE COUNTRY
 XINGU

 IN MOROCCO
 FIGHTING FRANCE
 ITALIAN BACKGROUNDS
 A MOTOR FLIGHT THROUGH FRANCE
 ARTEMIS TO ACTÆON
 THE DECORATION OF HOUSES

 _CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS_




                           A SON AT THE FRONT


                                    BY
                              EDITH WHARTON

 _Something veil’d and abstracted is often a part of the manners of these
                          beings._?WALT WHITMAN


                                 NEW YORK
                         CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS
                                 MCMXXIII




                       COPYRIGHT, 1922, 1923, BY
                        CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS

                Printed in the United States of America

                       Published September, 1923


[Illustration]




                               IN MEMORY

                                   OF

                             RONALD SIMMONS

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 BOOK I




                           A SON AT THE FRONT




                                   I


John Campton, the American portrait-painter, stood in his bare studio in
Montmartre at the end of a summer afternoon contemplating a battered
calendar that hung against the wall.

The calendar marked July 30, 1914.

Campton looked at this date with a gaze of unmixed satisfaction. His
son, his only boy, who was coming from America, must have landed in
England that morning, and after a brief halt in London would join him
the next evening in Paris. To bring the moment nearer, Campton, smiling
at his weakness, tore off the leaf and uncovered the 31. Then, leaning
in the window, he looked out over his untidy scrap of garden at the
silver-grey sea of Paris spreading mistily below him.

A number of visitors had passed through the studio that day. After years
of obscurity Campton had been projected into the light?or perhaps only
into the limelight?by his portrait of his son George, exhibited three
years earlier at the spring show of the French Society of Painters and
Sculptors. The picture seemed to its author to be exactly in the line of
the unnoticed things he had been showing before, though perhaps nearer
to what he was always trying for, because of the exceptional interest of
his subject. But to the public he had appeared to take a new turn; or
perhaps some critic had suddenly found the right phrase for him; or,
that season, people wanted a new painter to talk about. Didn’t he know
by heart all the Paris reasons for success or failure?

The early years of his career had given him ample opportunity to learn
them. Like other young students of his generation, he had come to Paris
with an exaggerated reverence for the few conspicuous figures who made
the old Salons of the ’eighties like bad plays written around a few
stars. If he could get near enough to Beausite, the ruling light of the
galaxy, he thought he might do things not unworthy of that great master;
but Beausite, who had ceased to receive pupils, saw no reason for making
an exception in favour of an obscure youth without a backing. He was not
kind; and on the only occasion when a painting of Campton’s came under
his eye he let fall an epigram which went the round of Paris, but
shocked its victim by its revelation of the great man’s ineptitude.

Campton, if he could have gone on admiring Beausite’s work, would have
forgotten his unkindness and even his critical incapacity; but as the
young painter’s personal convictions developed he discovered that his
idol had none, and that the dazzling _maestria_ still enveloping his
work was only the light from a dead star.

All these things were now nearly thirty years old. Beausite had vanished
from the heavens, and the youth he had sneered at throned there in his
stead. Most of the people who besieged Campton’s studio were the lineal
descendants of those who had echoed Beausite’s sneer. They belonged to
the types that Campton least cared to paint; but they were usually those
who paid the highest prices, and he had lately had new and imperious
reasons for wanting to earn all the money he could. So for two years he
had let it be as difficult and expensive as possible to be “done by
Campton”; and this oppressive July day had been crowded with the visits
of suppliants of a sort unused to waiting on anybody’s pleasure, people
who had postponed St. Moritz and Deauville, Aix and Royat, because it
was known that one had to accept the master’s conditions or apply
elsewhere.

The job bored him more than ever; the more of their fatuous faces he
recorded the more he hated the task; but for the last two or three days
the monotony of his toil had been relieved by a new element of interest.
This was produced by what he called the “war-funk,” and consisted in the
effect on his sitters and their friends of the suggestion that something
new, incomprehensible and uncomfortable might be about to threaten the
ordered course of their pleasures.

Campton himself did not “believe in the war” (as the current phrase
went); therefore he was able to note with perfect composure its
agitating effect upon his sitters. On the whole the women behaved best:
the idiotic Mme. de Dolmetsch had actually grown beautiful through fear
for her lover, who turned out (in spite of a name as exotic as hers) to
be a French subject of military age. The men had made a less creditable
showing?especially the big banker and promoter, Jorgenstein, whose round
red face had withered like a pricked balloon, and young Prince Demetrios
Palamedes, just married to the fabulously rich daughter of an Argentine
wheat-grower, and so secure as to his bride’s fortune that he could
curse impartially all the disturbers of his summer plans. Even the great
tuberculosis specialist, Fortin-Lescluze, whom Campton was painting in
return for the physician’s devoted care of George the previous year, had
lost something of his professional composure, and no longer gave out the
sense of tranquillizing strength which had been such a help in the boy’s
fight for health. Fortin-Lescluze, always in contact with the rulers of
the earth, must surely have some hint of their councils. Whatever it
was, he revealed nothing, but continued to talk frivolously and
infatuatedly about a new Javanese dancer whom he wanted Campton to
paint; but his large beaked face with its triumphant moustache had grown
pinched and grey, and he had forgotten to renew the dye on the
moustache.

Campton’s one really imperturbable visitor was little Charlie Alicante,
the Spanish secretary of Embassy at Berlin, who had dropped in on his
way to St. Moritz, bringing the newest news from the Wilhelmstrasse news
that was all suavity and reassurance, with a touch of playful reproach
for the irritability of French feeling, and a reminder of Imperial
longanimity in regard to the foolish misunderstandings of Agadir and
Saverne.

Now all the visitors had gone, and Campton, leaning in the window,
looked out over Paris and mused on his summer plans. He meant to plunge
straight down to Southern Italy and Sicily, perhaps even push over to
North Africa. That at least was what he hoped for: no sun was too hot
for him and no landscape too arid. But it all depended on George; for
George was going with him, and if George preferred Spain they would
postpone the desert.

It was almost impossible to Campton to picture what it would be like to
have the boy with him. For so long he had seen his son only in snatches,
hurriedly, incompletely, uncomprehendingly: it was only in the last
three years that their intimacy had had a chance to develop. And they
had never travelled together, except for hasty dashes, two or three
times, to seashore or mountains; had never gone off on a long solitary
journey such as this. Campton, tired, disenchanted, and nearing sixty,
found himself looking forward to the adventure with an eagerness as
great as the different sort of ardour with which, in his youth, he had
imagined flights of another kind with the woman who was to fulfill every
dream.

“Well?I suppose that’s the stuff pictures are made of,” he thought,
smiling at his inextinguishable belief in the completeness of his next
experience. Life had perpetually knocked him down just as he had his
hand on her gifts; nothing had ever succeeded with him but his work. But
he was as sure as ever that peace of mind and contentment of heart were
waiting for him round the next corner; and this time, it was clear, they
were to come to him through his wonderful son.

The doorbell rang, and he listened for the maidservant’s step. There was
another impatient jingle, and he remembered that his faithful Mariette
had left for Lille, where she was to spend her vacation with her family.
Campton, reaching for his stick, shuffled across the studio with his
lame awkward stride.

At the door stood his old friend Paul Dastrey, one of the few men with
whom he had been unbrokenly intimate since the first days of his
disturbed and incoherent Parisian life. Dastrey came in without
speaking: his small dry face, seamed with premature wrinkles of irony
and sensitiveness, looked unusually grave. The wrinkles seemed suddenly
to have become those of an old man; and how grey Dastrey had turned! He
walked a little stiffly, with a jauntiness obviously intended to conceal
a growing tendency to rheumatism.

In the middle of the floor he paused and tapped a varnished boot-tip
with his stick.

“Let’s see what you’ve done to Daisy Dolmetsch.”

“Oh, it’s been done for me?you’ll see!” Campton laughed. He was enjoying
the sight of Dastrey and thinking that this visit was providentially
timed to give him a chance of expatiating on his coming journey. In his
rare moments of expansiveness he felt the need of some substitute for
the background of domestic sympathy which, as a rule, would have simply
bored or exasperated him; and at such times he could always talk to
Dastrey.

The little man screwed up his eyes and continued to tap his varnished
toes.

“But she’s magnificent. She’s seen the Medusa!”

Campton laughed again. “Just so. For days and days I’d been trying to do
something with her; and suddenly the war-funk did it for me.”

“The war-funk?”

“Who’d have thought it? She’s frightened to death about Ladislas
Isador?who is French, it turns out, and mobilisable. The poor soul
thinks there’s going to be war!”

“Well, there _is_,” said Dastrey.

The two men looked at each other: Campton amused, incredulous, a shade
impatient at the perpetual recurrence of the same theme, and aware of
presenting a smile of irritating unresponsiveness to his friend’s solemn
gaze.

“Oh, come?you too? Why, the Duke of Alicante has just left here, fresh
from Berlin. You ought to hear him laugh at us....”

“How about Berlin’s laughing at _him_?” Dastrey sank into a wicker
armchair, drew out a cigarette and forgot to light it. Campton returned
to the window.

“There can’t be war: I’m going to Sicily and Africa with George the day
after to-morrow,” he broke out.

“Ah, George??. To be sure....”

There was a silence; Dastrey had not even smiled. He turned the unlit
cigarette in his dry fingers.

“Too young for ’seventy?and too old for this! Some men are born under a
curse,” he burst out.

“What on earth are you talking about?” Campton exclaimed, forcing his
gaiety a little.

Dastrey stared at him with furious eyes. “But I shall get something,
somewhere ... they can’t stop a man’s enlisting ... I had an old uncle
who did it in ’seventy ... he was older than I am now.”

Campton looked at him compassionately. Poor little circumscribed Paul
Dastrey, whose utmost adventure had been an occasional article in an art
review, an occasional six weeks in the near East! It was pitiful to see
him breathing fire and fury on an enemy one knew to be engaged, at that
very moment, in meeting England and France more than half-way in the
effort to smooth over diplomatic difficulties. But Campton could make
allowances for the nerves of the tragic generation brought up in the
shadow of Sedan.

“Look here,” he said, “I’ll tell you what. Come along with George and
me?as far as Palermo, anyhow. You’re a little stiff again in that left
knee, and we can bake our lamenesses together in the good Sicilian
oven.”

Dastrey had found a match and lighted his cigarette.

“My poor Campton?there’ll be war in three days.”

Campton’s incredulity was shot through with the deadly chill of
conviction. There it was?there would be war! It was too like his cursed
luck not to be true.... He smiled inwardly, perceiving that he was
viewing the question exactly as the despicable Jorgenstein and the
fatuous Prince Demetrios had viewed it: as an unwarrantable interference
with his private plans. Yes?but his case was different.... Here was the
son he had never seen enough of, never till lately seen at all as most
fathers see their sons; and the boy was to be packed off to New York
that winter, to go into a bank; and for the Lord knew how many months
this was to be their last chance, as it was almost their first, of being
together quietly, confidentially, uninterruptedly. These other men were
whining at the interruption of their vile pleasures or their viler
money-making; he, poor devil, was trembling for the chance to lay the
foundation of a complete and lasting friendship with his only son, at
the moment when such understandings do most to shape a youth’s
future.... “And with what I’ve had to fight against!” he groaned, seeing
victory in sight, and sickening at the idea that it might be snatched
from him.

Then another thought came, and he felt the blood leaving his ruddy face
and, as it seemed, receding from every vein of his heavy awkward body.
He sat down opposite Dastrey, and the two looked at each other.

“There won’t be war. But if there were?why shouldn’t George and I go to
Sicily? You don’t see us sitting here making lint, do you?”

Dastrey smiled. “Lint is unhygienic; you won’t have to do that. And I
see no reason why _you_ shouldn’t go to Sicily?or to China.” He paused.
“But how about George?I thought he and you were both born in France?”

Campton reached for a cigarette. “We were, worse luck. He’s subject to
your preposterous military regulations. But it doesn’t make any
difference, as it happens. He’s sure to be discharged after that touch
of tuberculosis he had last year, when he had to be rushed up to the
Engadine.”

“Ah, I see. Then, as you say.... Still, of course he wouldn’t be allowed
to leave the country.”

A constrained silence fell between the two. Campton became aware that,
for the first time since they had known each other, their points of view
were the width of the poles apart. It was hopeless to try to bridge such
a distance.

“Of course, you know,” he said, trying for his easiest voice, “I still
consider this discussion purely academic.... But if it turns out that
I’m wrong I shall do all I can?all I can, do you hear??to get George
discharged.... You’d better know that....”

Dastrey, rising, held out his hand with his faithful smile. “My dear old
Campton, I perfectly understand a foreigner’s taking that view....” He
walked toward the door and they parted without more words.

When he had gone Campton began to recover his reassurance. Who was
Dastrey, poor chap, to behave as if he were in the councils of the
powers? It was perfect nonsense to pretend that a diplomatist straight
from Berlin didn’t know more about what was happening there than the
newsmongers of the Boulevards. One didn’t have to be an Ambassador to
see which way the wind was blowing; and men like Alicante, belonging to
a country uninvolved in the affair, were the only people capable of a
cool judgment at moments of international tension.

Campton took the portrait of Mme. de Dolmetsch and leaned it against the
other canvases along the wall. Then he started clumsily to put the room
to rights?without Mariette he was so helpless?and finally, abandoning
the attempt, said to himself: “I’ll come and wind things up to-morrow.”

He was moving that day from the studio to the Hotel de Crillon, where
George was to join him the next evening. It would be jolly to be with
the boy from the moment he arrived; and, even if Mariette’s departure
had not paralyzed his primitive housekeeping, he could not have made
room for his son at the studio. So, reluctantly, for he loathed luxury
and conformity, but joyously, because he was to be with George, Campton
threw some shabby clothes into a shapeless portmanteau, and prepared to
despatch the concierge for a taxicab.

He was hobbling down the stairs when the old woman met him with a
telegram. He tore it open and saw that it was dated Deauville, and was
not, as he had feared, from his son.

“Very anxious. Must see you to-morrow. Please come to Avenue Marigny at
five without fail. Julia Brant.”

“Oh, damn,” Campton growled, crumpling up the message.

The concierge was looking at him with searching eyes.

“Is it war, sir?” she asked, pointing to the bit of blue paper. He
supposed she was thinking of her grandsons.

“No?no?nonsense! War?” He smiled into her shrewd old face, every wrinkle
of which seemed full of a deep human experience.

“War? Can you imagine anything more absurd? Can you, now? What should
you say if they told you war was going to be declared, Mme. Lebel?”

She gave him back his look with profound earnestness; then she spoke in
a voice of sudden resolution. “Why, I should say we don’t want it,
sir?I’d have four in it if it came?_but that this sort of thing has got
to stop_.”

Campton shrugged. “Oh, well?it’s not going to come, so don’t worry. And
call me a taxi, will you? No, no, I’ll carry the bags down myself.”




                                   II


“But even if they do mobilise: mobilisation is not war?_is_ it?” Mrs.
Anderson Brant repeated across the teacups.

Campton dragged himself up from the deep armchair he had inadvertently
chosen. To escape from his hostess’s troubled eyes he limped across to
the window and stood gazing out at the thick turf and brilliant
flower-borders of the garden which was so unlike his own. After a moment
he turned and glanced about him, catching the reflection of his heavy
figure in a mirror dividing two garlanded panels. He had not entered
Mrs. Brant’s drawing-room for nearly ten years; not since the period of
the interminable discussions about the choice of a school for George;
and in spite of the far graver preoccupations that now weighed on him,
and of the huge menace with which the whole world was echoing, he paused
for an instant to consider the contrast between his clumsy person and
that expensive and irreproachable room.

“You’ve taken away Beausite’s portrait of you,” he said abruptly,
looking up at the chimney-panel, which was filled with the blue and
umber bloom of a Fragonard landscape.

A full-length of Mrs. Anderson Brant by Beausite had been one of Mr.
Brant’s wedding-presents to his bride; a Beausite portrait, at that
time, was as much a part of such marriages as pearls and sables.

“Yes. Anderson thought ... the dress had grown so dreadfully
old-fashioned,” she explained indifferently; and went on again: “You
think it’s _not_ war: don’t you?”

What was the use of telling her what he thought? For years and years he
had not done that?about anything. But suddenly, now, a stringent
necessity had drawn them together, confronting them like any two plain
people caught in a common danger?like husband and wife, for example!

“It _is_ war, this time, I believe,” he said.

She set down her cup with a hand that had begun to tremble.

“I disagree with you entirely,” she retorted, her voice shrill with
anxiety. “I was frightfully upset when I sent you that telegram
yesterday; but I’ve been lunching to-day with the old Duc de
Montlhery?you know he fought in ’seventy?and with Levi-Michel of the
‘Jour,’ who had just seen some of the government people; and they both
explained to me quite clearly??”

“That you’d made a mistake in coming up from Deauville?”

To save himself Campton could not restrain the sneer; on the rare
occasions when a crisis in their lives flung them on each other’s mercy,
the first sensation he was always conscious of was the degree to which
she bored him. He remembered the day, years ago, long before their
divorce, when it had first come home to him that she was always going to
bore him. But he was ashamed to think of that now, and went on more
patiently: “You see, the situation is rather different from anything
we’ve known before; and, after all, in 1870 all the wise people thought
till the last minute that there would be no war.”

Her delicate face seemed to shrink and wither with apprehension.

“Then?what about George?” she asked, the paint coming out about her
haggard eyes.

Campton paused a moment. “You may suppose I’ve thought of _that_.”

“Oh, of course....” He saw she was honestly trying to be what a mother
should be in talking of her only child to that child’s father. But the
long habit of superficiality made her stammering and inarticulate when
her one deep feeling tried to rise to the surface.

Campton seated himself again, taking care to choose a straight-backed
chair. “I see nothing to worry about with regard to George,” he said.

“You mean???”

“Why, they won’t take him?they won’t want him ... with his medical
record.”

“Are you sure? He’s so much stronger.... He’s gained twenty pounds....”
It was terrible, really, to hear her avow it in a reluctant whisper!
That was the view that war made mothers take of the chief blessing they
could ask for their children! Campton understood her, and took the same
view. George’s wonderful recovery, the one joy his parents had shared in
the last twenty years, was now a misfortune to be denied and dissembled.
They looked at each other like accomplices, the same thought in their
eyes: if only the boy had been born in America! It was grotesque that
the whole of joy or anguish should suddenly be found to hang on a
geographical accident.

“After all, we’re Americans; this is not our job?” Campton began.

“No?” He saw she was waiting, and knew for what.

“So of course?if there were any trouble?but there won’t be; if there
were, though, I shouldn’t hesitate to do what was necessary ... use any
influence....”

“Oh, then we agree!” broke from her in a cry of wonder.

The unconscious irony of the exclamation struck him, and increased his
irritation. He remembered the tone?undefinably compassionate?in which
Dastrey had said: “I perfectly understand a foreigner’s taking that
view”.... But _was_ he a foreigner, Campton asked himself? And what was
the criterion of citizenship, if he, who owed to France everything that
had made life worth while, could regard himself as owing her nothing,
now that for the first time he might have something to give her? Well,
for himself that argument was all right: preposterous as he thought
war?any war?he would have offered himself to France on the instant if
she had had any use for his lame carcass. But he had never bargained to
give her his only son.

Mrs. Brant went on in excited argument.

“Of course you know how careful I always am to do nothing about him
without consulting you; but since you feel about it as _we_ do??” She
blushed under her faint rouge. The “we” had slipped out accidentally,
and Campton, aware of turning hard-lipped and grim, sat waiting for her
to repair the blunder. Through the years of his poverty it had been
impossible not to put up, on occasions, with that odious first person
plural: as long as his wretched inability to make money had made it
necessary that his wife’s second husband should pay for his son’s keep,
such allusions had been part of Campton’s long expiation. But even then
he had tacitly made his former wife understand that, when they had to
talk of the boy, he could bear her saying “I think,” or “Anderson
thinks,” this or that, but not “_we_ think it.” And in the last few
years, since Campton’s unforeseen success had put him, to the
astonishment of every one concerned, in a position of financial
independence, “Anderson” had almost entirely dropped out of their talk
about George’s future. Mrs. Brant was not a clever woman, but she had a
social adroitness that sometimes took the place of intelligence.

On this occasion she saw her mistake so quickly, and blushed for it so
painfully, that at any other time Campton would have smiled away her
distress; but at the moment he could not stir a muscle to help her.

“Look here,” he broke out, “there are things I’ve had to accept in the
past, and shall have to accept in the future. The boy is to go into
Bullard and Brant’s?it’s agreed; I’m not sure enough of being able to
provide for him for the next few years to interfere with?with your plans
in that respect. But I thought it was understood once for all??”

She interrupted him excitedly. “Oh, of course ... of course. You must
admit I’ve always respected your feeling....”

He acknowledged awkwardly: “Yes.”

“Well, then?won’t you see that this situation is different, terribly
different, and that we ought all to work together? If Anderson’s
influence can be of use....”

“Anderson’s influence??” Campton’s gorge rose against the phrase! It was
always Anderson’s influence that had been invoked?and none knew better
than Campton himself how justly?when the boy’s future was under
discussion. But in this particular case the suggestion was intolerable.

“Of course,” he interrupted drily. “But, as it happens, I think I can
attend to this job myself.”

She looked down at her huge rings, hesitated visibly, and then flung
tact to the winds. “What makes you think so? You don’t know the right
sort of people.”

It was a long time since she had thrown that at him: not since the
troubled days of their marriage, when it had been the cruellest taunt
she could think of. Now it struck him simply as a particularly
unpalatable truth. No, he didn’t know “the right sort of people” ...
unless, for instance, among his new patrons, such a man as Jorgenstein
answered to the description. But, if there were war, on what side would
a cosmopolitan like Jorgenstein turn out to be?

“Anderson, you see,” she persisted, losing sight of everything in the
need to lull her fears, “Anderson knows all the political people. In a
business way, of course, a big banker has to. If there’s really any
chance of George’s being taken you’ve no right to refuse Anderson’s
help?none whatever!”

Campton was silent. He had meant to reassure her, to reaffirm his
conviction that the boy was sure to be discharged. But as their eyes met
he saw that she believed this no more than he did; and he felt the
contagion of her incredulity.

“But if you’re so sure there’s not going to be war??” he began.

As he spoke he saw her face change, and was aware that the door behind
him had opened and that a short man, bald and slim, was advancing at a
sort of mincing trot across the pompous garlands of the Savonnerie
carpet. Campton got to his feet. He had expected Anderson Brant to stop
at sight of him, mumble a greeting, and then back out of the room?as
usual. But Anderson Brant did nothing of the sort: he merely hastened
his trot toward the tea-table. He made no attempt to shake hands with
Campton, but bowing shyly and stiffly said: “I understood you were
coming, and hurried back ... on the chance ... to consult....”

Campton gazed at him without speaking. They had not seen each other
since the extraordinary occasion, two years before, when Mr. Brant,
furtively one day at dusk, had come to his studio to offer to buy
George’s portrait; and, as their eyes met, the memory of that visit
reddened both their faces.

Mr. Brant was a compact little man of about sixty. His sandy hair, just
turning grey, was brushed forward over a baldness which was ivory-white
at the crown and became brick-pink above the temples, before merging
into the tanned and freckled surface of his face. He was always dressed
in carefully cut clothes of a discreet grey, with a tie to match, in
which even the plump pearl was grey, so that he reminded Campton of a
dry perpendicular insect in protective tints; and the fancy was
encouraged by his cautious manner, and the way he had of peering over
his glasses as if they were part of his armour. His feet were small and
pointed, and seemed to be made of patent leather; and shaking hands with
him was like clasping a bunch of twigs.

It had been Campton’s lot, on the rare occasions of his meeting Mr.
Brant, always to see this perfectly balanced man in moments of
disequilibrium, when the attempt to simulate poise probably made him
more rigid than nature had created him. But to-day his perturbation
betrayed itself in the gesture with which he drummed out a tune on the
back of the gold and platinum cigar-case he had unconsciously drawn from
his pocket.

After a moment he seemed to become aware of what he had in his hand, and
pressing the sapphire spring held out the case with the remark:
“Coronas.”

Campton made a movement of refusal, and Mr. Brant, overwhelmed, thrust
the cigar-case away.

“I ought to have taken one?I may need him,” Campton thought; and Mrs.
Brant said, addressing her husband: “He thinks as _we_ do?exactly.”

Campton winced. Thinking as the Brants did was, at all times, so foreign
to his nature and his principles that his first impulse was to protest.
But the sight of Mr. Brant, standing there helplessly, and trying to
hide the twitching of his lip by stroking his lavender-scented moustache
with a discreetly curved hand, moved the painter’s imagination.

“Poor devil?he’d give all his millions if the boy were safe,” he
thought, “and he doesn’t even dare to say so.”

It satisfied Campton’s sense of his rights that these two powerful
people were hanging on his decision like frightened children, and he
answered, looking at Mrs. Brant: “There’s nothing to be done at present
... absolutely nothing?? Except,” he added abruptly, “to take care not
to talk in this way to George.”

Mrs. Brant lifted a startled gaze.

“What do you mean? If war is declared, you can’t expect me not to speak
of it to him.”

“Speak of it as much as you like, but don’t drag him in. Let him work
out his own case for himself.”

He went on with an effort: “It’s what I intend to do.”

“But you said you’d use every influence!” she protested, obtusely.

“Well?I believe this is one of them.”

She looked down resignedly at her clasped hands, and he saw her lips
tighten. “My telling her that has been just enough to start her on the
other tack,” he groaned to himself, all her old stupidities rising up
around him like a fog.

Mr. Brant gave a slight cough and removed his protecting hand from his
lips.

“Mr. Campton is right,” he said, quickly and timorously. “I take the
same view?entirely. George must not know that we are thinking of using
... any means....” He coughed again, and groped for the cigar-case.

As he spoke, there came over Campton a sense of their possessing a
common ground of understanding that Campton had never found in his wife.
He had had a hint of the same feeling, but had voluntarily stifled it,
on the day when Mr. Brant, apologetic yet determined, had come to the
studio to buy George’s portrait. Campton had seen then how the man
suffered from his failure, but had chosen to attribute his distress to
the humiliation of finding there were things his money could not
purchase. Now, that judgment seemed as unimaginative as he had once
thought Mr. Brant’s overture. Campton turned on the banker a look that
was almost brotherly.

“We men know ...” the look said; and Mr. Brant’s parched cheek was
suffused with a flush of understanding. Then, as if frightened at the
consequences of such complicity, he repeated his bow and went out.

When Campton issued forth into the Avenue Marigny, it came to him as a
surprise to see the old unheeding life of Paris still going on. In the
golden decline of day the usual throng of idlers sat under the
horse-chestnuts of the Champs Elysees, children scampered between turf
and flowers, and the perpetual stream of motors rolled-up the central
avenue to the restaurants beyond the gates.

Under the last trees of the Avenue Gabriel the painter stood looking
across the Place de la Concorde. No doubt the future was dark: he had
guessed from Mr. Brant’s precipitate arrival that the banks and the
Stock Exchange feared the worst. But what could a man do, whose
convictions were so largely formed by the play of things on his retina,
when, in the setting sun, all that majesty of space and light and
architecture was spread out before him undisturbed? Paris was too
triumphant a fact not to argue down his fears. There she lay in the
security of her beauty, and once more proclaimed herself eternal.




                                  III


The night was so lovely that, though the Boulogne express arrived late,
George at once proposed dining in the Bois.

His luggage, of which, as usual, there was a good deal, was dropped at
the Crillon, and they shot up the Champs Elysees as the summer dusk
began to be pricked by lamps.

“How jolly the old place smells!” George cried, breathing in the scent
of sun-warmed asphalt, of flowerbeds and freshly-watered dust. He seemed
as much alive to such impressions as if his first word at the station
had not been: “Well, this time I suppose we’re in for it.” In for it
they might be; but meanwhile he meant to enjoy the scents and scenes of
Paris as acutely and unconcernedly as ever.

Campton had hoped that he would pick out one of the humble cyclists’
restaurants near the Seine; but not he. “Madrid, is it?” he said gaily,
as the taxi turned into the Bois; and there they sat under the
illuminated trees, in the general glitter and expensiveness, with the
Tziganes playing down their talk, and all around them the painted faces
that seemed to the father so old and obvious, and to the son, no doubt,
so full of novelty and mystery.

The music made conversation difficult; but Campton did not care. It was
enough to sit and watch the face in which, after each absence, he noted
a new and richer vivacity. He had often tried to make up his mind if his
boy were handsome. Not that the father’s eye influenced the painter’s;
but George’s young head, with its thick blond thatch, the complexion
ruddy to the golden eyebrows, and then abruptly white on the forehead,
the short amused nose, the inquisitive eyes, the ears lying back flat to
the skull against curly edges of fair hair, defied all rules and escaped
all classifications by a mixture of romantic gaiety and shrewd plainness
like that in certain eighteenth-century portraits.

As father and son faced each other over the piled-up peaches, while the
last sparkle of champagne died down in their glasses, Campton’s thoughts
went back to the day when he had first discovered his son. George was a
schoolboy of twelve, at home for the Christmas holidays. At home meant
at the Brants’, since it was always there he stayed: his father saw him
only on certain days. Usually Mariette fetched him to the studio on one
afternoon in the week; but this particular week George was ill, and it
had been arranged that in case of illness his father was to visit him at
his mother’s. He had one of his frequent bad colds, and Campton recalled
him, propped up in bed in his luxurious overheated room, a scarlet
sweater over his nightshirt, a book on his thin knees, and his ugly
little fever-flushed face bent over it in profound absorption. Till that
moment George had never seemed to care for books: his father had
resigned himself to the probability of seeing him grow up into the
ordinary pleasant young fellow, with his mother’s worldly tastes. But
the boy was reading as only a bookworm reads?reading with his very
finger-tips, and his inquisitive nose, and the perpetual dart ahead of a
gaze that seemed to guess each phrase from its last word. He looked up
with a smile, and said: “Oh, Dad ...” but it was clear that he regarded
the visit as an interruption. Campton, leaning over, saw that the book
was a first edition of Lavengro.

“Where the deuce did you get that?”

George looked at him with shining eyes. “Didn’t you know? Mr. Brant has
started collecting first editions. There’s a chap who comes over from
London with things for him. He lets me have them to look at when I’m
seedy. I say, isn’t this topping? Do you remember the fight?” And,
marvelling once more at the ways of Providence, Campton perceived that
the millionaire’s taste for owning books had awakened in his stepson a
taste for reading them. “I couldn’t have done that for him,” the father
had reflected with secret bitterness. It was not that a bibliophile’s
library was necessary to develop a taste for letters; but that Campton
himself, being a small reader, had few books about him, and usually
borrowed those few. If George had lived with him he might never have
guessed the boy’s latent hunger, for the need of books as part of one’s
daily food would scarcely have presented itself to him.

From that day he and George had understood each other. Initiation had
come to them in different ways, but their ardour for beauty had the same
root. The visible world, and its transposition in terms of one art or
another, were thereafter the subject of their interminable talks; and
Campton, with a passionate interest, watched his son absorbing through
books what had mysteriously reached him through his paintbrush.

They had been parted often, and for long periods; first by George’s
schooling in England, next by his French military service, begun at
eighteen to facilitate his entry into Harvard; finally, by his sojourn
at the University. But whenever they were together they seemed to make
up in the first ten minutes for the longest separation; and since George
had come of age, and been his own master, he had given his father every
moment he could spare.

His career at Harvard had been interrupted, after two years, by the
symptoms of tuberculosis which had necessitated his being hurried off to
the Engadine. He had returned completely cured, and at his own wish had
gone back to Harvard; and having finished his course and taken his
degree, he had now come out to join his father on a long holiday before
entering the New York banking-house of Bullard and Brant.

Campton, looking at the boy’s bright head across the lights and flowers,
thought how incredibly stupid it was to sacrifice an hour of such a life
to the routine of money-getting; but he had had that question out with
himself once for all, and was not going to return to it. His own
success, if it lasted, would eventually help him to make George
independent; but meanwhile he had no right to interfere with the boy’s
business training. He had hoped that George would develop some marked
talent, some irresistible tendency which would decide his future too
definitely for interference; but George was twenty-five, and no such
call had come to him. Apparently he was fated to be only a delighted
spectator and commentator; to enjoy and interpret, not to create. And
Campton knew that this absence of a special bent, with the strain and
absorption it implies, gave the boy his peculiar charm. The trouble was
that it made him the prey of other people’s plans for him. And now all
these plans?Campton’s dreams for the future as well as the business
arrangements which were Mr. Brant’s contribution?might be wrecked by
to-morrow’s news from Berlin. The possibility still seemed unthinkable;
but in spite of his incredulity the evil shadow hung on him as he and
his son chatted of political issues.

George made no allusion to his own case: his whole attitude was so
dispassionate that his father began to wonder if he had not solved the
question by concluding that he would not pass the medical examination.
The tone he took was that the whole affair, from the point of view of
twentieth-century civilization, was too monstrous an incongruity for
something not to put a stop to it at the eleventh hour. His easy
optimism at first stimulated his father, and then began to jar on him.

“Dastrey doesn’t think it can be stopped,” Campton said at length.

The boy smiled.

“Dear old Dastrey! No, I suppose not. That after-Sedan generation have
got the inevitability of war in their bones. They’ve never been able to
get beyond it. _Our_ whole view is different: we’re internationals,
whether we want to be or not.”

“To begin with, if by ‘our’ view you mean yours and mine, you and I
haven’t a drop of French blood in us,” his father interposed, “and we
can never really know what the French feel on such matters.”

George looked at him affectionately. “Oh, but I didn’t?I meant ‘we’ in
the sense of my generation, of whatever nationality. I know French chaps
who feel as I do?Louis Dastrey, Paul’s nephew, for one; and lots of
English ones. They don’t believe the world will ever stand for another
war. It’s too stupidly uneconomic, to begin with: I suppose you’ve read
Angell? Then life’s worth too much, and nowadays too many millions of
people know it. That’s the way we all feel. Think of everything that
counts?art and science and poetry, and all the rest?going to smash at
the nod of some doddering diplomatist! It was different in old times,
when the best of life, for the immense majority, was never anything but
plague, pestilence and famine. People are too healthy and well-fed now;
they’re not going off to die in a ditch to oblige anybody.”

Campton looked away, and his eye, straying over the crowd, lit on the
long heavy face of Fortin-Lescluze, seated with a group of men on the
other side of the garden.

Why had it never occurred to him before that if there was one being in
the world who could get George discharged it was the great specialist
under whose care he had been?

“Suppose war does come,” the father thought, “what if I were to go over
and tell him I’ll paint his dancer?” He stood up and made his way
between the tables.

Fortin-Lescluze was dining with a party of jaded-looking politicians and
journalists. To reach him Campton had to squeeze past another table, at
which a fair worn-looking lady sat beside a handsome old man with a
dazzling mane of white hair and a Grand Officer’s rosette of the Legion
of Honour. Campton bowed, and the lady whispered something to her
companion, who returned a stately vacant salute. Poor old Beausite,
dining alone with his much-wronged and all-forgiving wife, bowing to the
people she told him to bow to, and placidly murmuring: “War?war,” as he
stuck his fork into the peach she had peeled!

At Fortin’s table the faces were less placid. The men greeted Campton
with a deference which was not lost on Mme. Beausite, and the painter
bent close over Fortin, embarrassed at the idea that she might overhear
him. “If I can make time for a sketch?will you bring your dancing lady
to-morrow?”

The physician’s eyes lit up under their puffy lids.

“My dear friend?will I? She’s simply set her heart on it!” He drew out
his watch and added: “But why not tell her the good news yourself? You
told me, I think, you’d never seen her? This is her last night at the
‘Posada,’ and if you’ll jump into my motor we shall be just in time to
see her come on.”

Campton beckoned to George, and father and son followed Fortin-Lescluze.
None of the three men, on the way back to Paris, made any reference to
the war. The physician asked George a few medical questions, and
complimented him on his look of recovered health; then the talk strayed
to studios and theatres, where Fortin-Lescluze firmly kept it.

The last faint rumours of the conflict died out on the threshold of the
“Posada.” It would have been hard to discern, in the crowded audience,
any appearance but that of ordinary pleasure-seekers momentarily stirred
by a new sensation. Collectively, fashionable Paris was already away, at
the seashore or in the mountains, but not a few of its chief ornaments
still lingered, as the procession through Campton’s studio had proved;
and others had returned drawn back by doubts about the future, the
desire to be nearer the source of news, the irresistible French craving
for the forum and the market when messengers are foaming in. The public
of the “Posada,” therefore, was still Parisian enough to flatter the new
dancer; and on all the pleasure-tired faces, belonging to every type of
money-getters and amusement-seekers, Campton saw only the old familiar
music-hall look: the look of a house with lights blazing and windows
wide, but nobody and nothing within.

The usualness of it all gave him a sense of ease which his boy’s
enjoyment confirmed. George, lounging on the edge of their box, and
watching the yellow dancer with a clear-eyed interest refreshingly
different from Fortin’s tarnished gaze, George so fresh and cool and
unafraid, seemed to prove that a world which could produce such youths
would never again settle its differences by the bloody madness of war.

Gradually Campton became absorbed in the dancer and began to observe her
with the concentration he brought to bear on any subject that attracted
his brush. He saw that she was more paintable than he could have hoped,
though not in the extravagant dress and attitude he was sure her eminent
admirer would prefer; but rather as a little crouching animal against a
sun-baked wall. He smiled at the struggle he should have when the
question of costume came up.

“Well, I’ll do her, if you like,” he turned to say; and two tears of
senile triumph glittered on the physician’s cheeks.

“To-morrow, then?at two?may I bring her? She leaves as soon as possible
for the south. She lives on sun, heat, radiance....”

“To-morrow?yes,” Campton nodded.

His decision once reached, the whole subject bored him, and in spite of
Fortin’s entreaties he got up and signalled to George.

As they strolled home through the brilliant midnight streets, the boy
said: “Did I hear you tell old Fortin you were going to do his dancer?”

“Yes?why not? She’s very paintable,” said Campton, abruptly shaken out
of his security.

“Beginning to-morrow?”

“Why not?”

“Come, you know?_to-morrow_!” George laughed.

“We’ll see,” his father rejoined, with an obscure sense that if he went
on steadily enough doing his usual job it might somehow divert the
current of events.

On the threshold of the hotel they were waylaid by an elderly man with a
round face and round eyes behind gold eye-glasses. His grey hair was cut
in a fringe over his guileless forehead, and he was dressed in expensive
evening clothes, and shone with soap and shaving; but the anxiety of a
frightened child puckered his innocent brow and twitching cheeks.

“My dear Campton?the very man I’ve been hunting for! You remember
me?your cousin Harvey Mayhew of Utica?”

Campton, with an effort, remembered, and asked what he could do,
inwardly hoping it was not a portrait.

“Oh, the simplest thing in the world. You see, I’m here as a Delegate??”
At Campton’s look of enquiry, Mr. Mayhew interrupted himself to explain:
“To the Peace Congress at The Hague??why, yes: naturally. I landed only
this morning, and find myself in the middle of all this rather foolish
excitement, and unable to make out just how I can reach my destination.
My time is?er?valuable, and it is very unfortunate that all this
commotion should be allowed to interfere with our work. It would be most
annoying if, after having made the effort to break away from Utica, I
should arrive too late for the opening of the Congress.”

Campton looked at him wonderingly. “Then you’re going anyhow?”

“Going? Why not? You surely don’t think???” Mr. Mayhew threw back his
shoulders, pink and impressive. “I shouldn’t, in any case, allow
anything so opposed to my convictions as _war_ to interfere with my
carrying out my mandate. All I want is to find out the route least
likely to be closed if?if this monstrous thing should happen.”

Campton considered. “Well, if I were you, I should go round by
Luxembourg?it’s longer, but you’ll be out of the way of trouble.” He
gave a nod of encouragement, and the Peace Delegate thanked him
profusely.

Father and son were lodged on the top floor of the Crillon, in the
little apartment which opens on the broad terraced roof. Campton had
wanted to put before his boy one of the city’s most perfect scenes; and
when they reached their sitting-room George went straight out onto the
terrace, and leaning on the parapet, called back: “Oh, don’t go to bed
yet?it’s too jolly.”

Campton followed, and the two stood looking down on the festal expanse
of the Place de la Concorde strown with great flower-clusters of lights
between its pearly distances. The sky was full of stars, pale, remote,
half-drowned in the city’s vast illumination; and the foliage of the
Champs Elysees and the Tuileries made masses of mysterious darkness
behind the statues and the flashing fountains.

For a long time neither father nor son spoke; then Campton said: “Are
you game to start the day after to-morrow?”

George waited a moment. “For Africa?”

“Well?my idea would be to push straight through to the south?as far as
Palermo, say. All this cloudy watery loveliness gives me a furious
appetite for violent red earth and white houses crackling in the glare.”

George again pondered; then he said: “It sounds first-rate. But if
you’re so sure we’re going to start why did you tell Fortin to bring
that girl to-morrow?”

Campton, reddening in the darkness, felt as if his son’s clear eyes were
following the motions of his blood. Had George suspected why he had
wanted to ingratiate himself with the physician?

“It was stupid?I’ll put her off,” he muttered. He dropped into an
armchair, and sat there, in his clumsy infirm attitude, his arms folded
behind his head, while George continued to lean on the parapet.

The boy’s question had put an end to their talk by baring the throbbing
nerve of his father’s anxiety. If war were declared the next day, what
did George mean to do? There was every hope of his obtaining his
discharge; but would he lend himself to the attempt? The deadly fear of
crystallizing his son’s refusal by forcing him to put it into words kept
Campton from asking the question.




                                   IV


The evening was too beautiful, and too full of the sense of fate, for
sleep to be possible, and long after George had finally said “All the
same, I think I’ll turn in,” his father sat on, listening to the gradual
subsidence of the traffic, and watching the night widen above Paris.

As he sat there, discouragement overcame him. His last plan, his plan
for getting George finally and completely over to his side, was going to
fail as all his other plans had failed. If there were war there would be
no more portraits to paint, and his vision of wealth would vanish as
visions of love and happiness and comradeship had one by one faded away.
Nothing had ever succeeded with him but the thing he had in some moods
set least store by, the dogged achievement of his brush; and just as
that was about to assure his happiness, here was this horrible
world-catastrophe threatening to fall across his path.

His misfortune had been that he could neither get on easily with people
nor live without them; could never wholly isolate himself in his art,
nor yet resign himself to any permanent human communion that left it
out, or, worse still, dragged it in irrelevantly. He had tried both
kinds, and on the whole preferred the first. His marriage, his stupid
ill-fated marriage, had after all not been the most disenchanting of his
adventures, because Julia Ambrose, when she married him, had made no
pretense of espousing his art.

He had seen her first in the tumble-down Venetian palace where she lived
with her bachelor uncle, old Horace Ambrose, who dabbled in bric-a-brac
and cultivated a guileless Bohemianism. Campton, looking back, could
still understand why, to a youth fresh from Utica, at odds with his
father, unwilling to go into the family business, and strangling with
violent unexpressed ideas on art and the universe, marriage with Julia
Ambrose had seemed so perfect a solution. She had been brought up abroad
by her parents, a drifting and impecunious American couple; and after
their deaths, within a few months of each other, her education had been
completed, at her uncle’s expense, in a fashionable Parisian convent.
Thence she had been transplanted at nineteen to his Venetian household,
and all the ideas that most terrified and scandalized Campton’s family
were part of the only air she had breathed. She had never intentionally
feigned an exaggerated interest in his ambitions. But her bringing-up
made her regard them as natural; she knew what he was aiming at, though
she had never understood his reasons for trying. The jargon of art was
merely one of her many languages; but she talked it so fluently that he
had taken it for her mother-tongue.

The only other girls he had known well were his sisters?earnest
eye-glassed young women, whose one answer to all his problems was that
he ought to come home. The idea of Europe had always been terrifying to
them, and indeed to his whole family, since the extraordinary
misadventure whereby, as the result of a protracted diligence journey
over bad roads, of a violent thunderstorm, and a delayed steamer,
Campton had been born in Paris instead of Utica. Mrs. Campton the elder
had taken the warning to heart, and never again left her native soil;
but the sisters, safely and properly brought into the world in their own
city and State, had always felt that Campton’s persistent yearnings for
Europe, and his inexplicable detachment from Utica and the Mangle, were
mysteriously due to the accident of their mother’s premature
confinement.

Compared with the admonitions of these domestic censors, Miss Ambrose’s
innocent conversation was as seductive as the tangles of Neæra’s hair,
and it used to be a joke between them (one of the few he had ever been
able to make her see) that he, the raw up-Stater, was Parisian born,
while she, the glass and pattern of worldly knowledge, had seen the
light in the pure atmosphere of Madison Avenue.

Through her, in due course, he came to know another girl, a queer abrupt
young American, already an old maid at twenty-two, and in open revolt
against her family for reasons not unlike his own. Adele Anthony had
come abroad to keep house for a worthless “artistic” brother, who was
preparing to be a sculptor by prolonged sessions in Anglo-American bars
and the lobbies of music-halls. When he finally went under, and was
shipped home, Miss Anthony stayed on in Paris, ashamed, as she told
Campton, to go back and face the righteous triumph of a family
connection who had unanimously disbelieved in the possibility of making
Bill Anthony into a sculptor, and in the wisdom of his sister’s staking
her small means on the venture.

“Somehow, behind it all, I was right, and they were wrong; but to do
anything with poor Bill I ought to have been able to begin two or three
generations back,” she confessed.

Miss Anthony had many friends in Paris, of whom Julia Ambrose was the
most admired; and she had assisted sympathizingly (if not
enthusiastically) at Campton’s wooing of Julia, and their hasty
marriage. Her only note of warning had been the reminder that Julia had
always been poor, and had always lived as if she were rich; and that was
silenced by Campton’s rejoinder that the Magic Mangle, to which the
Campton prosperity was due, was some day going to make him rich, though
he had always lived as if he were poor.

“Well?you’d better not, any longer,” Adele sharply advised; and he
laughed, and promised to go out and buy a new hat. In truth, careless of
comfort as he was, he adored luxury in women, and was resolved to let
his wife ruin him if she did it handsomely enough. Doubtless she might
have, had fate given her time; but soon after their marriage old Mr.
Campton died, and it was found that a trusted manager had so invested
the profits of the Mangle that the heirs inherited only a series of
law-suits.

John Campton, henceforth, was merely the unsuccessful son of a ruined
manufacturer; painting became a luxury he could no longer afford, and
his mother and sisters besought him to come back and take over what was
left of the business. It seemed so clearly his duty that, with anguish
of soul, he prepared to go; but Julia, on being consulted, developed a
sudden passion for art and poverty.

“We’d have to live in Utica?for some years at any rate?”

“Well, yes, no doubt??” They faced the fact desolately.

“They’d much better look out for another manager. What do you know about
business? Since you’ve taken up painting you’d better try to make a
success of that,” she advised him; and he was too much of the same mind
not to agree.

It was not long before George’s birth, and they were fully resolved to
go home for the event, and thus spare their hoped for heir the
inconvenience of coming into the world, like his father, in a foreign
country. But now this was not to be thought of, and the eventual
inconvenience to George was lost sight of by his progenitors in the
contemplation of nearer problems.

For a few years their life dragged along shabbily and depressingly. Now
that Campton’s painting was no longer an amateur’s hobby but a domestic
obligation, Julia thought it her duty to interest herself in it; and her
only idea of doing so was by means of what she called “relations,” using
the word in its French and diplomatic sense.

She was convinced that her husband’s lack of success was due to
Beausite’s blighting epigram, and to Campton’s subsequent resolve to
strike out for himself. “It’s a great mistake to try to be original till
people have got used to you,” she said, with the shrewdness that
sometimes startled him. “If you’d only been civil to Beausite he would
have ended by taking you up, and then you could have painted as queerly
as you liked.”

Beausite, by this time, had succumbed to the honours which lie in wait
for such talents, and in his starred and titled maturity his earlier
dread of rivals had given way to a prudent benevolence. Young artists
were always welcome at the receptions he gave in his sumptuous hotel of
the Avenue du Bois. Those who threatened to be rivals were even invited
to dine; and Julia was justified in triumphing when such an invitation
finally rewarded her efforts.

Campton, with a laugh, threw the card into the stove.

“If you’d only understand that that’s not the way,” he said.

“What is, then?”

“Why, letting all that lot see what unutterable rubbish one thinks
them!”

“I should have thought you’d tried that long enough,” she said with pale
lips; but he answered jovially that it never palled on him.

She was bitterly offended; but she knew Campton by this time, and was
not a woman to waste herself in vain resentment. She simply suggested
that since he would not profit by Beausite’s advance the only
alternative was to try to get orders for portraits; and though at that
stage he was not in the mood for portrait-painting, he made an honest
attempt to satisfy her. She began, of course, by sitting for him. She
sat again and again; but, lovely as she was, he was not inspired, and
one day, in sheer self-defence, he blurted out that she was not
paintable. She never forgot the epithet, and it loomed large in their
subsequent recriminations.

Adele Anthony?it was just like her?gave him his first order, and she did
prove paintable. Campton made a success of her long crooked pink-nosed
face; but she didn’t perceive it (she had wanted something oval, with
tulle, and a rose in a taper hand), and after heroically facing the
picture for six months she hid it away in an attic, whence, a year or so
before the date of the artist’s present musings, it had been fished out
as an “early Campton,” to be exhibited half a dozen times, and have
articles written about it in the leading art reviews.

Adele’s picture acted as an awful warning to intending patrons,
and after one or two attempts at depicting mistrustful friends
Campton refused to constrain his muse, and no more was said of
portrait-painting. But life in Paris was growing too expensive. He
persuaded Julia to try Spain, and they wandered about there for a
year. She was not fault-finding, she did not complain, but she
hated travelling, she could not eat things cooked in oil, and his
pictures seemed to her to be growing more and more ugly and
unsalable.

Finally they came one day to Ronda, after a trying sojourn at Cordova.
In the train Julia had moaned a little at the mosquitoes of the previous
night, and at the heat and dirt of the second-class compartment; then,
always conscious of the ill-breeding of fretfulness, she had bent her
lovely head above her Tauchnitz. And it was then that Campton, looking
out of the window to avoid her fatally familiar profile, had suddenly
discovered another. It was that of a peasant girl in front of a small
whitewashed house, under a white pergola hung with bunches of big red
peppers. The house, which was close to the railway, was propped against
an orange-coloured rock, and in the glare cast up from the red earth its
walls looked as blue as snow in shadow. The girl was all blue-white too,
from her cotton skirt to the kerchief knotted turban-wise above two
folds of blue-black hair. Her round forehead and merry nose were
relieved like a bronze medallion against the wall; and she stood with
her hands on her hips, laughing at a little pig asleep under a
cork-tree, who lay on his side like a dog.

The vision filled the carriage-window and then vanished; but it remained
so sharply impressed on Campton that even then he knew what was going to
happen. He leaned back with a sense of relief, and forgot everything
else.

The next morning he said to his wife: “There’s a little place up the
line that I want to go back and paint. You don’t mind staying here a day
or two, do you?”

She said she did not mind; it was what she always said; but he was
somehow aware that this was the particular grievance she had always been
waiting for. He did not care for that, or for anything but getting a
seat in the diligence which started every morning for the village
nearest the white house. On the way he remembered that he had left Julia
only forty pesetas, but he did not care about that either.... He stayed
a month, and when he returned to Ronda his wife had gone back to Paris,
leaving a letter to say that the matter was in the hands of her lawyers.

“What did you do it for?I mean in that particular way? For goodness
knows I understand all the rest,” Adele Anthony had once asked him,
while the divorce proceedings were going on; and he had shaken his head,
conscious that he could not explain.

It was a year or two later that he met the first person who _did_
understand: a Russian lady who had heard the story, was curious to know
him, and asked, one day, when their friendship had progressed, to see
the sketches he had brought back from his _fugue_.

“_Comme je vous comprends!_” she had murmured, her grey eyes deep in
his; but perceiving that she did not allude to the sketches, but to his
sentimental adventure, Campton pushed the drawings out of sight, vexed
with himself for having shown them.

He forgave the Russian lady her artistic obtuseness for the sake of her
human comprehension. They had met at the loneliest moment of his life,
when his art seemed to have failed him like everything else, and when
the struggle to get possession of his son, which had been going on in
the courts ever since the break with Julia, had finally been decided
against him. His Russian friend consoled, amused and agitated him, and
after a few years drifted out of his life as irresponsibly as she had
drifted into it; and he found himself, at forty-five, a lonely thwarted
man, as full as ever of faith in his own powers, but with little left in
human nature or in opportunity. It was about this time that he heard
that Julia was to marry again, and that his boy would have a stepfather.

He knew that even his own family thought it “the best thing that could
happen.” They were tired of clubbing together to pay Julia’s alimony,
and heaved a united sigh of relief when they learned that her second
choice had fallen, not on the bankrupt “foreign Count” they had always
dreaded, but on the Paris partner of the famous bank of Bullard and
Brant. Mr. Brant’s request that his wife’s alimony should be
discontinued gave him a moral superiority which even Campton’s recent
successes could not shake. It was felt that the request expressed the
contempt of an income easily counted in seven figures for a pittance
painfully screwed up to four; and the Camptons admired Mr. Brant much
more for not needing their money than for refusing it.

Their attitude left John Campton without support in his struggle to keep
a hold on his boy. His family sincerely thought George safer with the
Brants than with his own father, and the father could advance to the
contrary no arguments they would have understood. All the forces of
order seemed leagued against him; and it was perhaps this fact that
suddenly drove him into conformity with them. At any rate, from the day
of Julia’s remarriage no other woman shared her former husband’s life.
Campton settled down to the solitude of his dusty studio at Montmartre,
and painted doggedly, all his thoughts on George.

                  *       *       *       *       *

At this point in his reminiscences the bells of Sainte Clotilde rang out
the half-hour after midnight, and Campton rose and went into the
darkened sitting-room.

The door into George’s room was open, and in the silence the father
heard the boy’s calm breathing. A light from the bathroom cast its ray
on the dressing-table, which was scattered with the contents of George’s
pockets. Campton, dwelling with a new tenderness on everything that
belonged to his son, noticed a smart antelope card-case (George had his
mother’s weakness for Bond Street novelties), a wrist-watch, his studs,
a bundle of bank-notes; and beside these a thumbed and dirty red book,
the size of a large pocket-diary.

The father wondered what it was; then of a sudden he knew. He had once
seen Mme. Lebel’s grandson pull just such a red book from his pocket as
he was leaving for his “twenty-eight days” of military service; it was
the _livret militaire_ that every French citizen under forty-eight
carries about with him.

Campton had never paid much attention to French military regulations:
George’s service over, he had dismissed the matter from his mind,
forgetting that his son was still a member of the French army, and as
closely linked to the fortunes of France as the grandson of the
concierge of Montmartre. Now it occurred to him that that little red
book would answer the questions he had not dared to put; and stealing
in, he possessed himself of it and carried it back to the sitting-room.
There he sat down by the lamp and read.

First George’s name, his domicile, his rank as a _marechal des logis_ of
dragoons, the number of his regiment and its base: all that was already
familiar. But what was this on the next page?

“In case of general mobilisation announced to the populations of France
by public proclamations, or by notices posted in the streets, the bearer
of this order is to rejoin his regiment at ??.

“He is to take with him provisions for one day.

“He is to present himself at the station of ?? on the third day of
mobilisation at 6 o’clock, and to take the train indicated by the
station-master.

“The days of mobilisation are counted from 0 o’clock to 24 o’clock. The
first day is that on which the order of mobilisation is published.”

Campton dropped the book and pressed his hands to his temples. “The days
of mobilisation are counted from 0 o’clock to 24 o’clock. The first day
is that on which the order of mobilisation is published.” Then, if
France mobilised that day, George would start the second day after, at
six in the morning. George might be going to leave him within
forty-eight hours from that very moment!

Campton had always vaguely supposed that, some day or other, if war
came, a telegram would call George to his base; it had never occurred to
him that every detail of the boy’s military life had long since been
regulated by the dread power which had him in its grasp.

He read the next paragraph: “The bearer will travel free of charge??”
and thought with a grin how it would annoy Anderson Brant that the
French government should presume to treat his stepson as if he could not
pay his way. The plump bundle of bank-notes on the dressing-table seemed
to look with ineffectual scorn at the red book that sojourned so
democratically in the same pocket. And Campton, picturing George jammed
into an overcrowded military train, on the plebeian wooden seat of a
third-class compartment, grinned again, forgetful of his own anxiety in
the vision of Brant’s exasperation.

Ah, well, it wasn’t war yet, whatever they said!

He carried the red book back to the dressing-table. The light falling
across the bed drew his eye to the young face on the pillow. George lay
on his side, one arm above his head, the other laxly stretched along the
bed. He had thrown off the blankets, and the sheet, clinging to his
body, modelled his slim flank and legs as he lay in dreamless rest.

For a long time Campton stood gazing; then he stole back to the
sitting-room, picked up a sketch-book and pencil and returned. He knew
there was no danger of waking George, and he began to draw, eagerly but
deliberately, fascinated by the happy accident of the lighting, and of
the boy’s position.

“Like a statue of a young knight I’ve seen somewhere,” he said to
himself, vexed and surprised that he, whose plastic memories were always
so precise, should not remember where; and then his pencil stopped. What
he had really thought was: “Like the _effigy_ of a young knight”?though
he had instinctively changed the word as it formed itself. He leaned in
the doorway, the sketch-book in hand, and continued to gaze at his son.
It was the clinging sheet, no doubt, that gave him that look ... and the
white glare of the electric burner.

If war came, that was just the way a boy might lie on a battle-field-or
afterward in a hospital bed. Not _his_ boy, thank heaven; but very
probably his boy’s friends: hundreds and thousands of boys like his boy,
the age of his boy, with a laugh like his boy’s.... The wicked waste of
it! Well, that was what war meant ... what to-morrow might bring to
millions of parents like himself.

He stiffened his shoulders, and opened the sketch-book again. What
watery stuff was he made of, he wondered? Just because the boy lay as if
he were posing for a tombstone!... What of Signorelli, who had sat at
his dead son’s side and drawn him, tenderly, minutely, while the coffin
waited?

Well, damn Signorelli?that was all! Campton threw down his book, turned
out the sitting-room lights, and limped away to bed.




                                   V


The next morning he said to George, over coffee on the terrace: “I think
I’ll drop in at Cook’s about our tickets.”

George nodded, munching his golden roll.

“Right. I’ll run up to see mother, then.”

His father was silent. Inwardly he was saying to himself: “The chances
are she’ll be going back to Deauville this afternoon.”

There had not been much to gather from the newspapers heaped at their
feet. Austria had ordered general mobilisation; but while the tone of
the despatches was nervous and contradictory that of the leading
articles remained almost ominously reassuring. Campton absorbed the
reassurance without heeding its quality: it was a drug he had to have at
any price.

He expected the Javanese dancer to sit to him that afternoon, but he had
not proposed to George to be present. On the chance that things might
eventually take a wrong turn he meant to say a word to Fortin-Lescluze;
and the presence of his son would have been embarrassing.

“You’ll be back for lunch?” he called to George, who still lounged on
the terrace in pyjamas.

“Rather.?That is, unless mother makes a point ... in case she’s
leaving.”

“Oh, of course,” said Campton with grim cordiality.

“You see, dear old boy, I’ve got to see Uncle Andy some time....” It was
the grotesque name that George, in his babyhood, had given to Mr. Brant,
and when he grew up it had been difficult to substitute another.
“Especially now??” George added, pulling himself up out of his chair.

“Now?”

They looked at each other in silence, irritation in the father’s eye,
indulgent amusement in the son’s.

“Why, if you and I are really off on this long trek??”

“Oh, of course,” agreed Campton, relieved. “You’d much better lunch with
them. I always want you to do what’s decent.” He paused on the threshold
to add: “By the way, don’t forget Adele.”

“Well, rather not,” his son responded. “And we’ll keep the evening free
for something awful.”

As he left the room he heard George rapping on the telephone and calling
out Miss Anthony’s number.

Campton had to have reassurance at any price; and he got it, as usual,
irrationally but irresistibly, through his eyes. The mere fact that the
midsummer sun lay so tenderly on Paris, that the bronze dolphins of the
fountains in the square were spraying the Nereids’ Louis Philippe
chignons as playfully as ever; that the sleepy Cities of France dozed as
heavily on their thrones, and the Horses of Marly pranced as fractiously
on their pedestals; that the glorious central setting of the city lay
there in its usual mellow pomp?all this gave him a sense of security
that no crisscrossing of Reuters and Havases could shake.

Nevertheless, he reflected that there was no use in battling with the
silly hysterical crowd he would be sure to encounter at Cook’s; and
having left word with the hotel-porter to secure two “sleepings” on the
Naples express, he drove to the studio.

On the way, as his habit was, he thought hard of his model: everything
else disappeared like a rolled-up curtain, and his inner vision centred
itself on the little yellow face he was to paint.

Peering through her cobwebby window, he saw old Mme. Lebel on the watch.
He knew she wanted to pounce out and ask if there would be war; and
composing his most taciturn countenance he gave her a preoccupied nod
and hurried by.

The studio looked grimy and disordered, and he remembered that he had
intended, the evening before, to come back and set it to rights. In
pursuance of this plan, he got out a canvas, fussed with his brushes and
colours, and then tried once more to make the place tidy. But his
attempts at order always resulted in worse confusion; the fact had been
one of Julia’s grievances against him, and he had often thought that a
reaction from his ways probably explained the lifeless neatness of the
Anderson Brant drawing-room.

Campton had fled to Montmartre to escape a number of things: first of
all, the possibility of meeting people who would want to talk about the
European situation, then of being called up by Mrs. Brant, and lastly of
having to lunch alone in a fashionable restaurant. In his morbid dread
of seeing people he would have preferred an omelette in the studio, if
only Mariette had been at hand to make it; and he decided, after a vain
struggle with his muddled “properties,” to cross over to the Luxembourg
quarter and pick up a meal in a wine-shop.

He did not own to himself his secret reason for this decision; but it
caused him, after a glance at his watch, to hasten his steps down the
rue Montmartre and bribe a passing taxi to carry him to the Museum of
the Luxembourg. He reached it ten minutes before the midday closing, and
hastening past the serried statues, turned into a room half-way down the
gallery. Whistler’s Mother and the Carmencita of Sargent wondered at
each other from its walls; and on the same wall with the Whistler hung
the picture Campton had come for: his portrait of his son. He had given
it to the Luxembourg the day after Mr. Brant had tried to buy it, with
the object of inflicting the most cruel slight he could think of on the
banker.

In the generous summer light the picture shone out on him with a
communicative warmth: never had he seen so far into its depths. “No
wonder,” he thought, “it opened people’s eyes to what I was trying for.”

He stood and stared his own eyes full, mentally comparing the features
before him with those of the firmer harder George he had left on the
terrace of the Crillon, and noting how time, while fulfilling the rich
promise of the younger face, had yet taken something from its
brightness.

Campton, at that moment, found more satisfaction than ever in thinking
how it must have humiliated Brant to have the picture given to France.
“He could have understood my keeping it myself?or holding it for a
bigger price?but _giving it_??!” The satisfaction was worth the
sacrifice of the best record he would ever have of that phase of his
son’s youth. At various times afterward he had tried for the same
George, but not one of his later studies had that magic light on it.
Still, he was glad he had given the picture. It was safe, safer than it
would have been with him. His great dread had always been that if his
will were mislaid (and his things were always getting mislaid) the
picture might be sold, and fall into Brant’s hands after his death.

The closing signal drove him out of the Museum, and he turned into the
first wine-shop. He had advised George to lunch with the Brants, but
there was disappointment in his heart. Seeing the turn things were
taking, he had hoped the boy would feel the impulse to remain with him.
But, after all, at such a time a son could not refuse to go to his
mother. Campton pictured the little party of three grouped about the
luncheon-table in the high cool dining-room of the Avenue Marigny, with
the famous Hubert Robert panels, and the Louis XV silver and Sevres;
while he, the father, George’s father, sat alone at the soiled table of
a frowsy wine-shop.

Well?it was he who had so willed it. Life was too crazy a muddle?and who
could have foreseen that he might have been repaid for twenty-six years
with such a wife by keeping an undivided claim on such a son?

His meal over, he hastened back to the studio, hoping to find the dancer
there. Fortin-Lescluze had sworn to bring her at two, and Campton was
known to exact absolute punctuality. He had put the final touch to his
fame by refusing to paint the mad young Duchesse de la Tour Crenelee?who
was exceptionally paintable?because she had kept him waiting
three-quarters of an hour. But now, though it was nearly three, and the
dancer and her friend had not come, Campton dared not move, lest he
should miss Fortin-Lescluze.

“Sent for by a rich patient in a war-funk; or else hanging about in the
girl’s dressing-room while she polishes her toe-nails,” Campton
reflected; and sulkily sat down to wait.

He had never been willing to have a telephone. To him it was a live
thing, a kind of Laocoon-serpent that caught one in its coils and
dragged one struggling to the receiver. His friends had spent all their
logic in trying to argue away this belief; but he answered obstinately:
“Every one would be sure to call me up when Mariette was out.” Even the
Russian lady, during her brief reign, had pleaded in vain on this point.

He would have given a good deal now if he had listened to her. The
terror of having to cope with small material difficulties, always
strongest in him in moments of artistic inspiration?when the hushed
universe seemed hardly big enough to hold him and his model?this dread
anchored him to his seat while he tried to make up his mind to send Mme.
Lebel to the nearest telephone-station.

If he called to her, she would instantly begin: “And the war, sir?” And
he would have to settle that first. Besides, if he did not telephone
himself he could not make sure of another appointment with
Fortin-Lescluze. But the idea of battling alone with the telephone in a
public place covered his large body with a damp distress. If only George
had been in reach!

He waited till four, and then, furious, locked the studio and went down.
Mme. Lebel still sat in her spidery den. She looked at him gravely,
their eyes met, they exchanged a bow, but she did not move or speak. She
was busy as usual with some rusty sewing?he thought it odd that she
should not rush out to waylay him. Everything that day was odd.

He found all the telephone-booths besieged. The people waiting were
certainly bad cases of war-funk, to judge from their looks; after
scrutinizing them for a while he decided to return to his hotel, and try
to communicate with Fortin-Lescluze from there.

To his annoyance there was not a taxi to be seen. He limped down the
slope of Montmartre to the nearest metro-station, and just as he was
preparing to force his lame bulk into a crowded train, caught sight of a
solitary horse-cab: a vehicle he had not risked himself in for years.

The cab-driver, for gastronomic reasons, declined to take him farther
than the Madeleine; and getting out there, Campton walked along the rue
Royale. Everything still looked wonderfully as usual; and the fountains
in the Place sparkled gloriously.

Comparatively few people were about: he was surprised to see how few. A
small group of them, he noticed, had paused near the doorway of the
Ministry of Marine, and were looking?without visible excitement?at a
white paper pasted on the wall.

He crossed the street and looked too. In the middle of the paper, in
queer Gothic-looking characters, he saw the words

=“Les Armees De Terre et De Mer....”=

War had come??

He knew now that he had never for an instant believed it possible. Even
when he had had that white-lipped interview with the Brants, even when
he had planned to take Fortin-Lescluze by his senile infatuation, and
secure a medical certificate for George; even then, he had simply been
obeying the superstitious impulse which makes a man carry his umbrella
when he goes out on a cloudless morning.

War had come.

He stood on the edge of the sidewalk, and tried to think?now that it was
here?what it really meant: that is, what it meant to him. Beyond that he
had no intention of venturing. “This is not our job anyhow,” he
muttered, repeating the phrase with which he had bolstered up his talk
with Julia.

But abstract thinking was impossible: his confused mind could only
snatch at a few drifting scraps of purpose. “Let’s be practical,” he
said to himself.

The first thing to do was to get back to the hotel and call up the
physician. He strode along at his fastest limp, suddenly contemptuous of
the people who got in his way.

“War?and they’ve nothing to do but dawdle and gape! How like the
French!” He found himself hating the French.

He remembered that he had asked to have his sleepings engaged for the
following night. But even if he managed to secure his son’s discharge,
there could be no thought, now, of George’s leaving the country; and he
stopped at the desk to cancel the order.

There was no one behind the desk: one would have said that confusion
prevailed in the hall, if its emptiness had not made the word
incongruous. At last a waiter with rumpled hair strayed out of the
restaurant, and of him, imperiously, Campton demanded the concierge.

“The concierge? He’s gone.”

“To get my places for Naples?”

The waiter looked blank. “Gone: mobilised?to join his regiment. It’s the
war.”

“But look here, some one must have attended to getting my places, I
suppose,” cried Campton wrathfully. He invaded the inner office and
challenged a secretary who was trying to deal with several unmanageable
travellers, but who explained to him, patiently, that his sleepings had
certainly not been engaged, as no trains were leaving Paris for the
present. “Not for civilian travel,” he added, still more patiently.

Campton had a sudden sense of suffocation. No trains leaving Paris “for
the present”? But then people like himself?people who had nothing on
earth to do with the war?had been caught like rats in a trap! He
reflected with a shiver that Mrs. Brant would not be able to return to
Deauville, and would probably insist on his coming to see her every day.
He asked: “How long is this preposterous state of things to last?”?but
no one answered, and he stalked to the lift and had himself carried
upstairs.

He was confident that George would be there waiting; but the
sitting-room was empty. He felt as if he were on a desert island, with
the last sail disappearing over the dark rim of the world.

After much vain ringing he got into communication with Fortin’s house,
and heard a confused voice saying that the physician had already left
Paris.

“Left?for where? For how long?”

And then the eternal answer: “The doctor is mobilised. _It’s the war._”

Mobilised?already? Within the first twenty-four hours? A man of Fortin’s
age and authority? Campton was terrified by the uncanny rapidity with
which events were moving, he whom haste had always confused and
disconcerted, as if there were a secret link between his lameness and
the movements of his will. He rang up Dastrey, but no one answered.
Evidently his friend was out, and his friend’s _bonne_ also. “I suppose
_she’s_ mobilised: they’ll be mobilising the women next.”

At last, from sheer over-agitation, his fatigued mind began to move more
deliberately: he collected his wits, laboured with his more immediate
difficulties, and decided that he would go to Fortin-Lescluze’s house,
on the chance that the physician had not, after all, really started.

“Ten to one he won’t go till to-morrow,” Campton reasoned.

The hall of the hotel was emptier than ever, and no taxi was in sight
down the whole length of the rue Royale, or the rue Boissy d’Anglas, or
the rue de Rivoli: not even a horse-cab showed against the deserted
distances. He crossed to the metro, and painfully descended its many
stairs.




                                   VI


Campton, proffering twenty francs to an astonished maid-servant, learned
that, yes, to his intimates?and of course Monsieur was one??the doctor
_was_ in, was in fact dining, and did not leave till the next morning.

“Dining?at six o’clock?”

“Monsieur’s son, Monsieur Jean, is starting at once for his depot.
That’s the reason.”

Campton sent in his card. He expected to be received in the so-called
“studio,” a lofty room with Chinese hangings, Renaissance choir-stalls,
organ, grand piano, and post-impressionist paintings, where
Fortin-Lescluze received the celebrities of the hour. Mme. Fortin never
appeared there, and Campton associated the studio with amusing talk,
hot-house flowers, and ladies lolling on black velvet divans. He
supposed that the physician was separated from his wife, and that she
had a home of her own.

When the maid reappeared she did not lead him to the studio, but into a
small dining-room with the traditional Henri II sideboard of waxed
walnut, a hanging table-lamp under a beaded shade, an India-rubber plant
on a plush pedestal, and napkins that were just being restored to their
bone rings by the four persons seated about the red-and-white checkered
table-cloth.

These were: the great man himself, a tall large woman with grey hair, a
tiny old lady, her face framed in a peasant’s fluted cap, and a plain
young man wearing a private’s uniform, who had a nose like the doctor’s
and simple light blue eyes.

The two ladies and the young man?so much more interesting to the
painter’s eye than the sprawling beauties of the studio?were introduced
by Fortin-Lescluze as his wife, his mother and his son. Mme. Fortin
said, in a deep alto, a word or two about the privilege of meeting the
famous painter who had portrayed her husband, and the old mother, in a
piping voice, exclaimed: “Monsieur, I was at Sedan in 1870. I saw the
Germans. I saw the Emperor sitting on a bench. He was crying.”

“My mother’s heard everything, she’s seen everything. There’s no one in
the world like my mother!” the physician said, laying his hand on hers.

“You won’t see the Germans again, _ma bonne mere_!” her daughter-in-law
added, smiling.

Campton took coffee with them, bore with a little inevitable talk about
the war, and then eagerly questioned the son. The young man was a
chemist, a _preparateur_ in the laboratory of the Institut Pasteur. He
was also, it appeared, given to prehistoric archæology, and had written
a “thesis” on the painted caves of the Dordogne. He seemed extremely
serious, and absorbed in questions of science and letters. But it
appeared to him perfectly simple to be leaving it all in a few hours to
join his regiment. “The war had to come. This sort of thing couldn’t go
on,” he said, in the words of Mme. Lebel.

He was to start in an hour, and Campton excused himself for intruding on
the family, who seemed as happily united, as harmonious in their deeper
interests, as if no musical studio-parties and exotic dancers had ever
absorbed the master of the house.

Campton, looking at the group, felt a pang of envy, and thought, for the
thousandth time, how frail a screen of activity divided him from depths
of loneliness he dared not sound. “‘For every man hath business and
desire,’” he muttered as he followed the physician.

In the consulting-room he explained: “It’s about my son??”

He had not been able to bring the phrase out in the presence of the
young man who must have been just George’s age, and who was leaving in
an hour for his regiment. But between Campton and the father there were
complicities, and there might therefore be accommodations. In the
consulting-room one breathed a lower air.

It was not that Campton wanted to do anything underhand. He was
genuinely anxious about George’s health. After all, tuberculosis did not
disappear in a month or even a year: his anxiety was justified. And then
George, but for the stupid accident of his birth, would never have been
mixed up in the war. Campton felt that he could make his request with
his head high.

Fortin-Lescluze seemed to think so too; at any rate he expressed no
surprise. But could anything on earth have surprised him, after thirty
years in that confessional of a room?

The difficulty was that he did not see his way to doing anything?not
immediately, at any rate.

“You must let the boy join his base. He leaves to-morrow? Give me the
number of his regiment and the name of the town, and trust me to do what
I can.”

“But you’re off yourself?”

“Yes: I’m being sent to a hospital at Lyons. But I’ll leave you my
address.”

Campton lingered, unable to take this as final. He looked about him
uneasily, and then, for a moment, straight into the physician’s eyes.

“You must know how I feel; your boy is an only son, too.”

“Yes, yes,” the father assented, in the absent-minded tone of
professional sympathy. But Campton felt that he felt the deep
difference.

“Well, goodbye?and thanks.”

As Campton turned to go the physician laid a hand on his shoulder and
spoke with sudden fierce emotion. “Yes: Jean is an only son?an only
child. For his mother and myself it’s not a trifle?having our only son
in the war.”

There was no allusion to the dancer, no hint that Fortin remembered her;
it was Campton who lowered his gaze before the look in the other
father’s eyes.




                                  VII


“A son in the war??”

The words followed Campton down the stairs. What did it mean, and what
must it feel like, for parents in this safe denationalized modern world
to be suddenly saying to each other with white lips: A son in the war?

He stood on the kerbstone, staring ahead of him and forgetting whither
he was bound. The world seemed to lie under a spell, and its weight was
on his limbs and brain. Usually any deep inward trouble made him more
than ever alive to the outward aspect of things; but this new world in
which people talked glibly of sons in the war had suddenly become
invisible to him, and he did not know where he was, or what he was
staring at. He noted the fact, and remembered a story of St. Bernard?he
thought it was?walking beside a beautiful lake in supersensual ecstasy,
and saying afterward: “Was there a lake? I didn’t see it.”

On the way back to the hotel he passed the American Embassy, and had a
vague idea of trying to see the Ambassador and find out if the United
States were not going to devise some way of evading the tyrannous
regulation that bound young Americans to France. “And they call this a
free country!” he heard himself exclaiming.

The remark sounded exactly like one of Julia’s, and this reminded him
that the Ambassador frequently dined at the Brants’. They had certainly
not left his door untried; and since, to the Brant circles, Campton was
still a shaggy Bohemian, his appeal was not likely to fortify theirs.

His mind turned to Jorgenstein, and the vast web of the speculator’s
financial relations. But, after all, France was on the verge of war, if
not in it; and following up the threads of the Jorgenstein web was
likely to land one in Frankfort or Vienna.

At the hotel he found his sitting-room empty; but presently the door
opened and George came in laden with books, fresh yellow and grey ones
in Flammarion wrappers.

“Hullo, Dad,” he said; and added: “So the silly show is on.”

“Mobilisation is not war??,” said Campton.

“No??”

“What on earth are all those books?”

“Provender. It appears we may rot at the depot for weeks. I’ve just seen
a chap who’s in my regiment.”

Campton felt a sudden relief. The purchase of the books proved that
George was fairly sure he would not be sent to the front. His father
went up to him and tapped him on the chest.

“How about this???” He wanted to add: “I’ve just seen Fortin, who says
he’ll get you off”; but though George’s eye was cool and unenthusiastic
it did not encourage such confidences.

“Oh?lungs? I imagine I’m sound again.” He paused, and stooped to turn
over the books. Carelessly, he added: “But then the stethoscope may
think differently. Nothing to do but wait and see.”

“Of course,” Campton agreed.

It was clear that the boy hated what was ahead of him; and what more
could his father ask? Of course he was not going to confess to a desire
to shirk his duty; but it was easy to see that his whole lucid
intelligence repudiated any sympathy with the ruinous adventure.

“Have you seen Adele?” Campton enquired, and George replied that he had
dropped in for five minutes, and that Miss Anthony wanted to see his
father.

“Is she?nervous?”

“Old Adele? I should say not: she’s fighting mad. _La Revanche_ and all
the rest of it. She doesn’t realize?_sancta simplicitas!_”

“Oh, I can see Adele throwing on the faggots!”

Father and son were silent, both busy lighting cigarettes. When George’s
was lit he remarked: “Well, if we’re not called at once it’ll be a good
chance to read ‘The Golden Bough’ right through.”

Campton stared, not knowing the book even by name. What a queer
changeling the boy was! But George’s composure, his deep and genuine
indifference to the whole political turmoil, once more fortified his
father.

“Have they any news??” he ventured. “They,” in their private language,
meant the Brants.

“Oh, yes, lots: Uncle Andy was stiff with it. But not really amounting
to anything. Of course there’s no doubt there’ll be war.”

“How about England?”

“Nobody knows; but the bankers seem to think England’s all right.”
George paused, and finally added: “Look here, dear old boy?before she
leaves I think mother wants to see you.”

Campton hardened instantly. “She _has_ seen me?yesterday.”

“I know; she told me.”

The son began to cut the pages of one of his books with a visiting-card
he had picked up, and the father stood looking out on the Place de la
Concorde through the leafy curtain of the terrace.

Campton knew that he could not refuse his son’s request; in his heart of
hearts he was glad it had been made, since it might mean that “they” had
found a way?perhaps through the Ambassador.

But he could never prevent a stiffening of his whole self at any summons
or suggestion from the Brants. He thought of the seeming unity of the
Fortin-Lescluze couple, and of the background of peaceful family life
revealed by the scene about the checkered table-cloth. Perhaps that was
one of the advantages of a social organization which still, as a whole,
ignored divorce, and thought any private condonation better than the
open breaking up of the family.

“All right; I’ll go??” he agreed. “Where are we dining?”

“Oh, I forgot?an awful orgy. Dastrey wants us at the Union. Louis
Dastrey is dining with him, and he let me ask Boylston??”

“Boylston???”

“You don’t know him. A chap who was at Harvard with me. He’s out here
studying painting at the Beaux Arts. He’s an awfully good sort, and he
wanted to see me before I go.”

The father’s heart sank. Only one whole day more with his boy, and this
last evening but one was to be spent with poor embittered Dastrey, and
two youths, one unknown to Campton, who would drown them in stupid
war-chatter! But it was what George wanted; and there must not be a
shade, for George, on these last hours.

“All right! You promised me something awful for to-night,” Campton
grinned sardonically.

“Do you mind? I’m sorry.”

“It’s only Dastrey’s damned chauvinism that I mind. Why don’t you ask
Adele to join the chorus?”

“Well?you’ll like Boylston,” said George.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Dastrey, after all, turned out less tragic and aggressive than Campton
had feared. His irritability had vanished, and though he was very grave
he seemed preoccupied only with the fate of Europe, and not with his
personal stake in the affair.

But the older men said little. The youngsters had the floor, and
Campton, as he listened to George and young Louis Dastrey, was overcome
by a sense of such dizzy unreality that he had to grasp the arms of his
ponderous leather armchair to assure himself that he was really in the
flesh and in the world.

What! Two days ago they were still in the old easy Europe, a Europe in
which one could make plans, engage passages on trains and steamers,
argue about pictures, books, theatres, ideas, draw as much money as one
chose out of the bank, and say: “The day after to-morrow I’ll be in
Berlin or Vienna or Belgrade.” And here they sat in their same evening
clothes, about the same shining mahogany writing-table, apparently the
same group of free and independent youths and elderly men, and in
reality prisoners, every one of them, hand-cuffed to this hideous masked
bully of “War”!

The young men were sure that the conflict was inevitable?the evening
papers left no doubt of it?and there was much animated discussion
between young Dastrey and George.

Already their views diverged; the French youth, theoretically at one
with his friend as to the senselessness of war in general, had at once
resolutely disengaged from the mist of doctrine the fatal necessity of
this particular war.

“It’s the old festering wound of Alsace-Lorraine: Bismarck foresaw it
and feared it?or perhaps planned it and welcomed it: who knows? But as
long as the wound was there, Germany believed that France would try to
avenge it, and as long as Germany believed that, she had to keep up her
own war-strength; and she’s kept it up to the toppling-over point,
ruining herself and us. That’s the whole thing, as I see it. War’s rot;
but to get rid of war forever we’ve got to fight this one first.”

It was wonderful to Campton that this slender learned youth should
already have grasped the necessity of the conflict and its deep causes.
While his own head was still spinning with wrath and bewilderment at the
bottomless perversity of mankind, Louis Dastrey had analyzed and
accepted the situation and his own part in it. And he was not simply
resigned; he was trembling with eagerness to get the thing over. “If
only England is with us we’re safe?it’s a matter of weeks,” he declared.

“Wait a bit?wait a bit; I want to know more about a whole lot of things
before I fix a date for the fall of Berlin,” his uncle interposed; but
Louis flung him a radiant look. “We’ve been there before, my uncle!”

“But there’s Russia too??” said Boylston explosively. He had not spoken
before.

“‘_Nous l’avons eu, votre Rhin allemand_,’” quoted George, as he poured
a golden Hock into his glass.

He was keenly interested, that was evident; but interested as a
looker-on, a dilettante. He had neither Valmy nor Sedan in his blood,
and it was as a sympathizing spectator that he ought by rights to have
been sharing his friend’s enthusiasm, not as a combatant compelled to
obey the same summons. Campton, glancing from one to another of their
brilliant faces, felt his determination harden to save George from the
consequences of his parents’ stupid blunder.

After dinner young Dastrey proposed a music-hall. The audience would be
a curious sight: there would be wild enthusiasm, and singing of the
Marseillaise. The other young men agreed, but their elders, after a
tacitly exchanged glance, decided to remain at the club, on the plea
that some one at the Ministry of War had promised to telephone if there
were fresh news.

Campton and Dastrey, left alone, stood on the balcony watching the
Boulevards. The streets, so deserted during the day, had become suddenly
and densely populated. Hardly any vehicles were in sight: the motor
omnibuses were already carrying troops to the stations, there was a
report abroad that private motors were to be requisitioned, and only a
few taxis and horse-cabs, packed to the driver’s box with young men in
spick-and-span uniforms, broke through the mass of pedestrians which
filled the whole width of the Boulevards. This mass moved slowly and
vaguely, swaying this way and that, as though it awaited a portent from
the heavens. In the glare of electric lamps and glittering
theatre-fronts the innumerable faces stood out vividly, grave, intent,
slightly bewildered. Except when the soldiers passed no cries or songs
came from the crowd, but only the deep inarticulate rumour which any
vast body of people gives forth.

“Queer??! How silent they are: how do you think they’re taking it?”
Campton questioned.

But Dastrey had grown belligerent again. He saw the throngs before him
bounding toward the frontier like the unchained furies of Rude’s
“Marseillaise”; whereas to Campton they seemed full of the dumb wrath of
an orderly and laborious people upon whom an unrighteous quarrel has
been forced. He knew that the thought of Alsace-Lorraine still stirred
in French hearts; but all Dastrey’s eloquence could not convince him
that these people wanted war, or would have sought it had it not been
thrust on them. The whole monstrous injustice seemed to take shape
before him, and to brood like a huge sky-filling dragon of the northern
darknesses over his light-loving, pleasure-loving, labour-loving France.

                  *       *       *       *       *

George came home late.

It was two in the morning of his last day with his boy when Campton
heard the door open, and saw a flash of turned on light.

All night he had lain staring into the darkness, and thinking, thinking:
thinking of George’s future, George’s friends, George and women, of that
unknown side of his boy’s life which, in this great upheaval of things,
had suddenly lifted its face to the surface. If war came, if George were
not discharged, if George were sent to the front, if George were killed,
how strange to think that things the father did not know of might turn
out to have been the central things of his son’s life!

The young man came in, and Campton looked at him as though he were a
stranger.

“Hullo, Dad?any news from the Ministry?” George, tossing aside his hat
and stick, sat down on the bed. He had a crumpled rose in his
button-hole, and looked gay and fresh, with the indestructible freshness
of youth.

“What do I really know of him?” the father asked himself.

Yes: Dastrey had had news. Germany had already committed acts of overt
hostility on the frontier: telegraph and telephone communications had
been cut, French locomotives seized, troops massed along the border on
the specious pretext of the “_Kriegsgefahr-zustand_.” It was war.

“Oh, well,” George shrugged. He lit a cigarette, and asked: “What did
you think of Boylston?”

“Boylston???”

“The fat brown chap at dinner.”

“Yes?yes?of course.” Campton became aware that he had not thought of
Boylston at all, had hardly been aware of his presence. But the
painter’s registering faculty was always latently at work, and in an
instant he called up a round face, shyly jovial, with short-sighted
brown eyes as sharp as needles, and dark hair curling tightly over a
wide watchful forehead.

“Why?I liked him.”

“I’m glad, because it was a tremendous event for him, seeing you. He
paints, and he’s been keen on your things for years.”

“I wish I’d known.... Why didn’t he say so? He didn’t say anything, did
he?”

“No: he doesn’t, much, when he’s pleased. He’s the very best chap I
know,” George concluded.




                                  VIII


That morning the irrevocable stared at him from the head-lines of the
papers. The German Ambassador was recalled. Germany had declared war on
France at 6.40 the previous evening; there was an unintelligible
allusion, in the declaration, to French aeroplanes throwing bombs on
Nuremberg and Wesel. Campton read that part of the message over two or
three times.

Aeroplanes throwing bombs? Aeroplanes as engines of destruction? He had
always thought of them as a kind of giant kite that fools went up in
when they were tired of breaking their necks in other ways. But
aeroplane bombardment as a cause for declaring war? The bad faith of it
was so manifest that he threw down the papers half relieved. Of course
there would be a protest on the part of the allies; a great country like
France would not allow herself to be bullied into war on such a pretext.

The ultimatum to Belgium was more serious; but Belgium’s gallant reply
would no doubt check Germany on that side. After all, there was such a
thing as international law, and Germany herself had recognized it.... So
his mind spun on in vain circles, while under the frail web of his
casuistry gloomed the obstinate fact that George was mobilised, that
George was to leave the next morning.

The day wore on: it was the shortest and yet most interminable that
Campton had ever known. Paris, when he went out into it, was more
dazzlingly empty than ever. In the hotel, in the hall, on the stairs, he
was waylaid by flustered compatriots?“Oh, Mr. Campton, you don’t know
me, but of course all Americans know _you_!”?who appealed to him for the
very information he was trying to obtain for himself: how one could get
money, how one could get hold of the concierge, how one could send
cables, if there was any restaurant where the waiters had not all been
mobilised, if he had any “pull” at the Embassy, or at any of the
steamship offices, or any of the banks. One disordered beauty blurted
out: “Of course, with your connection with Bullard and Brant”?and was
only waked to her mistake by Campton’s indignant stare, and his plunge
past her while she called out excuses.

But the name acted as a reminder of his promise to go and see Mrs.
Brant, and he decided to make his visit after lunch, when George would
be off collecting last things. Visiting the Brants with George would
have been beyond his capacity.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The great drawing-rooms, their awnings spread against the sun, their
tall windows wide to the glow of the garden, were empty when he entered;
but in a moment he was joined by a tall angular woman with a veil pushed
up untidily above her pink nose. Campton reflected that he had never
seen Adele Anthony in the daytime without a veil pushed up above a
flushed nose, and dangling in irregular wisps from the back of a small
hard hat of which the shape never varied.

“Julia will be here in a minute. When she told me you were coming I
waited.”

He was glad to have a word with her before meeting Mrs. Brant, though
his impulse had been almost as strong to avoid the one as the other. He
dreaded belligerent bluster as much as vain whimpering, and in the
depths of his soul he had to own that it would have been easier to talk
to Mr. Brant than to either of the women.

“Julia is powdering her nose,” Miss Anthony continued. “She has an idea
that if you see she’s been crying you’ll be awfully angry.”

Campton made an impatient gesture. “If I were?much it would matter!”

“Ah, but you might tell George; and George is not to know.” She paused,
and then bounced round on him abruptly. She always moved and spoke in
explosions, as if the wires that agitated her got tangled, and then were
too suddenly jerked loose.

“_Does_ George know?”

“About his mother’s tears?”

“About this plan you’re all hatching to have him discharged?”

Campton reddened under her lashless blue gaze, and the consciousness of
doing so made his answer all the curter.

“Probably not?unless you’ve told him!”

The shot appeared to reach the mark, for an answering blush suffused her
sallow complexion. “You’d better not put ideas into my head!” she
laughed. Something in her tone reminded him of all her old dogged
loyalties, and made him ashamed of his taunt.

“Anyhow,” he grumbled, “his place is not in the French army.”

“That was for you and Julia to decide twenty-six years ago, wasn’t it?
Now it’s up to him.”

Her capricious adoption of American slang, fitted anyhow into her
old-fashioned and punctilious English, sometimes amused but oftener
exasperated Campton.

“If you’re going to talk modern slang you ought to give up those
ridiculous stays, and not wear a fringe like a mid-Victorian royalty,”
he jeered, trying to laugh off his exasperation.

She let this pass with a smile. “Well, I wish I could find the language
to make you understand how much better it would be to leave George
alone. This war will be the making of him.”

“He’s made quite to my satisfaction as it is, thanks. But what’s the use
of talking? You always get your phrases out of books.”

The door opened, and Mrs. Brant came in.

Her appearance answered to Miss Anthony’s description. A pearly mist
covered her face, and some reviving liquid had cleared her congested
eyes. Her poor hands had suddenly grown so thin and dry that the heavy
rings, slipping down to the joints, slid back into place as she shook
hands with Campton.

“Thank you for coming,” she said.

“Oh??” he protested, helpless, and disturbed by Miss Anthony’s presence.
At the moment his former wife’s feelings were more intelligible to him
than his friend’s: the maternal fibre stirred in her, and made her more
appealing than any elderly virgin on the war-path.

“I’m off, my dears,” said the elderly virgin, as if guessing his
thought. Her queer shallow eyes included them both in a sweeping glance,
and she flung back from the threshold: “Be careful of what you say to
George.”

What they had to say to each other did not last many minutes. The Brants
had made various efforts, but had been baffled on all sides by the
general agitation and confusion. In high quarters the people they wanted
to see were inaccessible; and those who could be reached lent but a
distracted ear. The Ambassador had at once declared that he could do
nothing; others vaguely promised they “would see”?but hardly seemed to
hear what they were being asked.

“And meanwhile time is passing?and he’s going!” Mrs. Brant lamented.

The reassurance that Campton brought from Fortin-Lescluze, vague though
it was, came to her as a miraculous promise, and raised Campton suddenly
in her estimation. She looked at him with a new confidence, and he could
almost hear her saying to Brant, as he had so often heard her say to
himself: “You never seem able to get anything done. I don’t know how
other people manage.”

Her gratitude gave him the feeling of having been engaged in something
underhand and pusillanimous. He made haste to take leave, after
promising to pass on any word he might receive from the physician; but
he reminded her that he was not likely to hear anything till George had
been for some days at his base.

She acknowledged the probability of this, and clung to him with trustful
eyes. She was much disturbed by the preposterous fact that the
Government had already requisitioned two of the Brant motors, and
Campton had an idea that, dazzled by his newly-developed capacity to
“manage,” she was about to implore him to rescue from the clutches of
the authorities her Rolls-Royce and Anderson’s Delaunay.

He was hastening to leave when the door again opened. A rumpled-looking
maid peered in, evidently perplexed, and giving way doubtfully to a
young woman who entered with a rush, and then paused as if she too were
doubtful. She was pretty in an odd dishevelled way, and with her
elaborate clothes and bewildered look she reminded Campton of a
fashion-plate torn from its page and helplessly blown about the world.
He had seen the same type among his compatriots any number of times in
the last days.

“Oh, Mrs. Brant?yes, I _know_ you gave orders that you were not in to
anybody, but I just wouldn’t listen, and it’s not that poor woman’s
fault,” the visitor began, in a plaintive staccato which matched her sad
eyes and her fluttered veils.

“You see, I simply had to get hold of Mr. Brant, because I’m here
without a penny?literally!” She dangled before them a bejewelled
mesh-bag. “And in a hotel where they don’t know me. And at the bank they
wouldn’t listen to me, and they said Mr. Brant wasn’t there, though of
course I suppose he was; so I said to the cashier: ‘Very well, then,
I’ll simply go to the Avenue Marigny and batter in his door?unless you’d
rather I jumped into the Seine?’”

“Oh, Mrs. Talkett??” murmured Mrs. Brant.

“Really: it’s a case of my money or my life!” the young lady continued
with a studied laugh. She stood between them, artificial and yet so
artless, conscious of intruding but evidently used to having her
intrusions pardoned; and her large eyes turned interrogatively to
Campton.

“Of course my husband will do all he can for you. I’ll telephone,” said
Mrs. Brant; then, perceiving that her visitor continued to gaze at
Campton, she added: “Oh, no, _this_ is not ... this is Mr. Campton.”

“John Campton? I knew it!” Mrs. Talkett’s eyes became devouring and
brilliant. “Of course I ought to have recognized you at once?from your
photographs. I have one pinned up in my room. But I was so flurried when
I came in.” She detained the painter’s hand. “Do forgive me! For _years_
I’ve dreamed of your doing me ... you see, I paint a little myself ...
but it’s ridiculous to speak of such things now.” She added, as if she
were risking something: “I knew your son at St. Moritz. We saw a great
deal of him there, and in New York last winter.”

“Ah??” said Campton, bowing awkwardly.

“Cursed fools?all women,” he anathematized her on the way downstairs.

In the street, however, he felt grateful to her for reducing Mrs. Brant
to such confusion that she had made no attempt to detain him. His way of
life lay so far apart from his former wife’s that they had hardly ever
been exposed to accidents of the kind, and he saw that Julia’s
embarrassment kept all its freshness.

The fact set him thinking curiously of what her existence had been since
they had parted. She had long since forgotten her youthful art-jargon to
learn others more consonant to her tastes. As the wife of the powerful
American banker she dispensed the costliest hospitality with the simple
air of one who has never learnt that human life may be sustained without
the aid of orchids and champagne. With guests either brought up in the
same convictions or bent on acquiring them she conversed earnestly and
unweariedly about motors, clothes and morals; but perhaps her most
stimulating hours were those brightened by the weekly visit of the
Rector of her parish. With happy untrammelled hands she was now free to
rebuild to her own measure a corner of the huge wicked welter of Paris;
and immediately it became as neat, as empty, as air-tight as her own
immaculate drawing-room. There he seemed to see her, throning year after
year in an awful emptiness of wealth and luxury and respectability,
seeing only dull people, doing only dull things, and fighting feverishly
to defend the last traces of a beauty which had never given her anything
but the tamest and most unprofitable material prosperity.

“She’s never even had the silly kind of success she wanted?poor Julia!”
he mused, wondering that she had been able to put into her life so few
of the sensations which can be bought by wealth and beauty. “And now
what will be left?how on earth will she fit into a war?”

He was sure all her plans had been made for the coming six months: her
week-end sets of heavy millionaires secured for Deauville, and after
that for the shooting at the big chateau near Compiegne, and three weeks
reserved for Biarritz before the return to Paris in January. One of the
luxuries Julia had most enjoyed after her separation from Campton (Adele
had told him) had been that of planning things ahead: Mr. Brant, thank
heaven, was not impulsive. And now here was this black bolt of war
falling among all her carefully balanced arrangements with a crash more
violent than any of Campton’s inconsequences!

As he reached the Place de la Concorde a newsboy passed with the three
o’clock papers, and he bought one and read of the crossing of Luxembourg
and the invasion of Belgium. The Germans were arrogantly acting up to
their menace: heedless of international law, they were driving straight
for France and England by the road they thought the most accessible....

In the hotel he found George, red with rage, devouring the same paper:
the boy’s whole look was changed.

“The howling blackguards! The brigands! This isn’t war?it’s simple
murder!”

The two men stood and stared at each other. “Will England stand it?”
sprang to their lips at the same moment.

Never?never! England would never permit such a violation of the laws
regulating the relations between civilized peoples. They began to say
both together that after all perhaps it was the best thing that could
have happened, since, if there had been the least hesitation or
reluctance in any section of English opinion, this abominable outrage
would instantly sweep it away.

“They’ve been too damned clever for once!” George exulted. “France is
saved?that’s certain anyhow!”

Yes; France was saved if England could put her army into the field at
once. But could she? Oh, for the Channel tunnel at this hour! Would this
lesson at last cure England of her obstinate insularity? Belgium had
announced her intention of resisting; but what was that gallant
declaration worth in face of Germany’s brutal assault? A poor little
country pledged to a guaranteed neutrality could hardly be expected to
hold her frontiers more than forty-eight hours against the most powerful
army in Europe. And what a narrow strip Belgium was, viewed as an
outpost of France!

These thoughts, racing through Campton’s mind, were swept out of it
again by his absorbing preoccupation. What effect would the Belgian
affair have on George’s view of his own participation in the war? For
the first time the boy’s feelings were visibly engaged; his voice shook
as he burst out: “Louis Dastrey’s right: this kind of thing has got to
stop. We shall go straight back to cannibalism if it doesn’t.?God, what
hounds!”

Yes, but?Campton pondered, tried to think up Pacifist arguments,
remembered his own discussion with Paul Dastrey three days before. “My
dear chap, hasn’t France perhaps gone about with a chip on her shoulder?
Saverne, for instance: some people think??”

“Damn Saverne! Haven’t the Germans shown us what they are now? Belgium
sheds all the light _I_ want on Saverne. They’re not fit to live with
white people, and the sooner they’re shown it the better.”

“Well, France and Russia and England are here to show them.”

George laughed. “Yes, and double quick.”

Both were silent again, each thinking his own thoughts. They were
apparently the same, for just as Campton was about to ask where George
had decided that they should take their last dinner, the young man said
abruptly: “Look here, Dad; I’d planned a little tete-a-tete for us this
evening.”

“Yes???”

“Well?I can’t. I’m going to chuck you.” He smiled a little, his colour
rising nervously. “For some people I’ve just run across?who were awfully
kind to me at St. Moritz?and in New York last winter. I didn’t know they
were here till ... till just now. I’m awfully sorry; but I’ve simply got
to dine with them.”

There was a silence. Campton stared out over his son’s shoulder at the
great sunlit square. “Oh, all right,” he said briskly.

This?on George’s last night!

“You don’t mind _much_, do you? I’ll be back early, for a last pow-wow
on the terrace.” George paused, and finally brought out: “You see, it
really wouldn’t have done to tell mother that I was deserting her on my
last evening because I was dining with you!”

A weight was lifted from Campton’s heart, and he felt ashamed of having
failed to guess the boy’s real motive.

“My dear fellow, naturally ... quite right. And you can stop in and see
your mother on the way home. You’ll find me here whenever you turn up.”

George looked relieved. “Thanks a lot?you always know. And now for my
adieux to Adele.”

He went off whistling the waltz from the Rosenkavalier, and Campton
returned to his own thoughts.

                  *       *       *       *       *

He was still revolving them when he went upstairs after a solitary
repast in the confused and servantless dining-room. Adele Anthony had
telephoned to him to come and dine?after seeing George, he supposed; but
he had declined. He wanted to be with his boy, or alone.

As he left the dining-room he ran across Adamson, the American newspaper
correspondent, who had lived for years in Paris and was reputed to have
“inside information.” Adamson was grave but confident. In his opinion
Russia would probably not get to Berlin before November (he smiled at
Campton’s astonished outcry); but if England?oh, they were sure of
England!?could get her army over without delay, the whole business would
very likely be settled before that, in one big battle in Belgium.
(Yes?poor Belgium, indeed!) Anyhow, in the opinion of the military
experts the war was not likely to last more than three or four months;
and of course, even if things went badly on the western front, which was
highly unlikely, there was Russia to clench the business as soon as her
huge forces got in motion. Campton drew much comfort from this sober
view of the situation, midway between that of the optimists who knew
Russia would be in Berlin in three weeks, and of those who saw the
Germans in Calais even sooner. Adamson was a levelheaded fellow, who
weighed what he said and pinned his faith to facts.

Campton managed to evade several people whom he saw lurking for him, and
mounted to his room. On the terrace, alone with the serene city, his
confidence grew, and he began to feel more and more sure that, whatever
happened, George was likely to be kept out of the fighting till the
whole thing was over. With such formidable forces closing in on her it
was fairly obvious that Germany must succumb before half or even a
quarter of the allied reserves had been engaged. Sustained by the
thought, he let his mind hover tenderly over George’s future, and the
effect on his character of this brief and harmless plunge into a
military career.




                                   IX


George was gone.

When, with a last whistle and scream, his train had ploughed its way out
of the clanging station; when the last young figures clinging to the
rear of the last carriage had vanished, and the bare rails again
glittered up from the cindery tracks, Campton turned and looked about
him.

All the platforms of the station were crowded as he had seldom seen any
place crowded, and to his surprise he found himself taking in every
detail of the scene with a morbid accuracy of observation. He had
discovered, during these last days, that his artist’s vision had been
strangely unsettled. Sometimes, as when he had left Fortin’s house, he
saw nothing: the material world, which had always tugged at him with a
thousand hands, vanished and left him in the void. Then again, as at
present, he saw everything, saw it too clearly, in all its superfluous
and negligible reality, instead of instinctively selecting, and
disregarding what was not to his purpose.

Faces, faces?they swarmed about him, and his overwrought vision
registered them one by one. Especially he noticed the faces of the
women, women of all ages, all classes. These were the wives, mothers,
grandmothers, sisters, mistresses of all those heavily laden trainfuls
of French youth. He was struck with the same strong cheerfulness in all:
some pale, some flushed, some serious, but all firmly and calmly
smiling.

One young woman in particular his look dwelt on?a dark girl in a
becoming dress?both because she was so pleasant to see, and because
there was such assurance in her serenity that she did not have to
constrain her lips and eyes, but could trust them to be what she wished.
Yet he saw by the way she clung to the young artilleryman from whom she
was parting that hers were no sisterly farewells.

An immense hum of voices filled the vast glazed enclosure. Campton
caught the phrases flung up to the young faces piled one above another
in the windows?words of motherly admonishment, little jokes, tender
names, mirthful allusions, last callings out: “Write often! Don’t forget
to wrap up your throat.... Remember to send a line to Annette.... Bring
home a Prussian helmet for the children! _On les aura, pas, mon vieux?_”
It was all bright, brave and confident. “If Berlin could only see it!”
Campton thought.

He tried to remember what his own last words to George had been, but
could not; yet his throat felt dry and thirsty, as if he had talked a
great deal. The train vanished in a roar, and he leaned against a pier
to let the crowd flood by, not daring to risk his lameness in such a
turmoil.

Suddenly he heard loud sobs behind him. He turned, and recognized the
hat and hair of the girl whose eyes had struck him. He could not see
them now, for they were buried in her hands and her whole body shook
with woe. An elderly man was trying to draw her away?her father,
probably.

“Come, come, my child??”

“Oh?oh?oh,” she hiccoughed, following blindly.

The people nearest stared at her, and the faces of other women grew
pale. Campton saw tears on the cheeks of an old body in a black bonnet
who might have been his own Mme. Lebel. A pale lad went away weeping.

But they were all afraid, then, all in immediate deadly fear for the
lives of their beloved! The same fear grasped Campton’s heart, a very
present terror, such as he had hardly before imagined. Compared to it,
all that he had felt hitherto seemed as faint as the sensations of a
looker-on. His knees failed him, and he grasped a transverse bar of the
pier.

People were leaving the station in groups of two or three who seemed to
belong to each other; only he was alone. George’s mother had not come to
bid her son goodbye; she had declared that she would rather take leave
of him quietly in her own house than in a crowd of dirty people at the
station. But then it was impossible to conceive of her being up and
dressed and at the Gare de l’Est at five in the morning?and how could
she have got there without her motor? So Campton was alone, in that
crowd which seemed all made up of families.

But no?not all. Ahead of him he saw one woman moving away alone, and
recognized, across the welter of heads, Adele Anthony’s adamantine hat
and tight knob of hair.

Poor Adele! So she had come too?and had evidently failed in her quest,
not been able to fend a way through the crowd, and perhaps not even had
a glimpse of her hero. The thought smote Campton with compunction: he
regretted his sneering words when they had last met, regretted refusing
to dine with her. He wished the barrier of people between them had been
less impenetrable; but for the moment it was useless to try to force a
way through it. He had to wait till the crowd shifted to other
platforms, whence other trains were starting, and by that time she was
lost to sight.

At last he was able to make his way through the throng, and as he came
out of a side entrance he saw her. She appeared to be looking for a
taxi?she waved her sunshade aimlessly. But no one who knew the Gare de
l’Est would have gone around that corner to look for a taxi; least of
all the practical Adele. Besides, Adele never took taxis: she travelled
in the bowels of the earth or on the dizziest omnibus tops.

Campton knew at once that she was waiting for him. He went up to her and
a guilty pink suffused her nose.

“You missed him after all???” he said.

“I?oh, no, I didn’t.”

“You didn’t? But I was with him all the time. We didn’t see you??”

“No, but _I_ saw?distinctly. That was all I went for,” she jerked back.

He slipped his arm through hers. “This crowd terrifies me. I’m glad you
waited for me,” he said.

He saw her pleasure, but she merely answered: “I’m dying of thirst,
aren’t you?”

“Yes?or hunger, or something. Could we find a _laiterie_?”

They found one, and sat down among early clerks and shop-girls, and a
few dishevelled women with swollen faces whom Campton had noticed in the
station. One of them, who sat opposite an elderly man, had drawn out a
pocket mirror and was powdering her nose.

Campton hated to see women powder their noses?one of the few merits with
which he credited Julia Brant was that of never having adopted these
dirty modern fashions, of continuing to make her toilet in private “like
a lady,” as people used to say when he was young. But now the gesture
charmed him, for he had recognized the girl who had been sobbing in the
station.

“How game she is! I like that. But why is she so frightened?” he
wondered. For he saw that her chocolate was untouched, and that the
smile had stiffened on her lips.

Since his talk with Adamson he could not bring himself to be seriously
alarmed. Fear had taken him by the throat for a moment in the station,
at the sound of the girl’s sobs; but already he had thrown it off.
Everybody agreed that the war was sure to be over in a few weeks; even
Dastrey had come round to that view; and with Fortin’s protection, and
the influences Anderson Brant could put in motion, George was surely
safe?as safe at his depot as anywhere else in this precarious world.
Campton poured out Adele’s coffee, and drank off his own as if it had
been champagne.

“Do you know anything about the people George was dining with last
night?” he enquired abruptly.

Miss Anthony knew everything and everybody in the American circle in
Paris; she was a clearing-house of Franco-American gossip, and it was
likely enough that if George had special reasons for wishing to spend
his last evening away from his family she would know why. But the chance
of her knowing what had been kept from him made Campton’s question, as
soon as it was put, seem indiscreet, and he added hastily: “Not that I
want??”

She looked surprised. “No: he didn’t tell me. Some young man’s affair, I
suppose....” She smirked absurdly, her lashless eyes blinking under the
pushed-back veil.

Campton’s mind had already strayed from the question. Nothing bored him
more than Adele doing the “sad dog,” and he was vexed at having given
her such a chance to be silly. What he wanted to know was whether George
had spoken to his old friend about his future?about his own idea of his
situation, and his intentions and wishes in view of the grim chance
which people, with propitiatory vagueness, call “anything happening.”
Had the boy left any word, any message with her for any one? But it was
useless to speculate, for if he had, the old goose, true as steel, would
never betray it by as much as a twitch of her lids. She could look, when
it was a question of keeping a secret, like such an impenetrable idiot
that one could not imagine any one’s having trusted a secret to her.

Campton had no wish to surprise George’s secrets, if the boy had any.
But their parting had been so hopelessly Anglo-Saxon, so curt and
casual, that he would have liked to think his son had left, somewhere, a
message for him, a word, a letter, in case ... in case there was
anything premonitory in the sobbing of that girl at the next table.

But Adele’s pink nose confronted him, as guileless as a rabbit’s, and he
went out with her unsatisfied. They parted at the door of the
restaurant, and Campton went to the studio to see if there were any news
of his maid-servant Mariette. He meant to return to sleep there that
night, and even his simple housekeeping was likely to be troublesome if
Mariette should not arrive.

On the way it occurred to him that he had not yet seen the morning
papers, and he stopped and bought a handful.

Negotiations, hopes, fears, conjectures?but nothing new or definite,
except the insolent fact of Germany’s aggression, and the
almost-certainty of England’s intervention. When he reached the studio
he found Mme. Lebel in her usual place, paler than usual, but with firm
lips and bright eyes. Her three grandsons had left for their depots the
day before: one was in the _Chasseurs Alpins_, and probably already on
his way to Alsace, another in the infantry, the third in the heavy
artillery; she did not know where the two latter were likely to be sent.
Her eldest son, their father, was dead; the second, a man of fifty, and
a cabinetmaker by trade, was in the territorials, and was not to report
for another week. He hoped, before leaving, to see the return of his
wife and little girl, who were in the Ardennes with the wife’s people.
Mme. Lebel’s mind was made up and her philosophy ready for immediate
application.

“It’s terribly hard for the younger people; but it had to be. I come
from Nancy, Monsieur: I remember the German occupation. I understand
better than my daughter-in-law....”

There was no news of Mariette, and small chance of having any for some
days, much less of seeing her. No one could tell how long civilian
travel would be interrupted. Mme. Lebel, moved by her lodger’s plight,
promised to “find some one”; and Campton mounted to the studio.

He had left it only two days before, on the day when he had vainly
waited for Fortin and his dancer; and an abyss already divided him from
that vanished time. Then his little world still hung like a straw above
an eddy; now it was spinning about in the central vortex.

The pictures stood about untidily, and he looked curiously at all those
faces which belonged to the other life. Each bore the mark of its own
immediate passions and interests; not one betrayed the least
consciousness of coming disaster except the face of poor Madame de
Dolmetsch, whose love had enlightened her. Campton began to think of the
future from the painter’s point of view. What a modeller of faces a
great war must be! What would the people who came through it look like,
he wondered.

His bell tinkled, and he turned to answer it. Dastrey, he supposed ...
he had caught a glimpse of his friend across the crowd at the Gare de
l’Est, seeing off his nephew, but had purposely made no sign. He still
wanted to be alone, and above all not to hear war-talk. Mme. Lebel,
however, had no doubt revealed his presence in the studio, and he could
not risk offending Dastrey.

When he opened the door it was a surprise to see there, instead of
Dastrey’s anxious face, the round rosy countenance of a well-dressed
youth with a shock of fair hair above eyes of childish candour.

“Oh?come in,” Campton said, surprised, but divining a compatriot in a
difficulty.

The youth obeyed, blushing his apologies.

“I’m Benny Upsher, sir,” he said, in a tone modest yet confident, as if
the name were an introduction.

“Oh??” Campton stammered, cursing his absent-mindedness and his
unfailing faculty for forgetting names.

“You’re a friend of George’s, aren’t you?” he risked.

“Yes?tremendous. We were at Harvard together?he was two years ahead of
me.”

“Ah?then you’re still there?”

Mr. Upsher’s blush became a mask of crimson. “Well?I thought I was, till
this thing happened.”

“What thing?”

The youth stared at the older man with a look of celestial wonder.

“This war.?George has started already, hasn’t he?”

“Yes. Two hours ago.”

“So they said?I looked him up at the Crillon. I wanted most awfully to
see him; if I had, of course I shouldn’t have bothered you.”

“My dear young man, you’re not bothering me. But what can I do?”

Mr. Upsher’s composure seemed to be returning as the necessary
preliminaries were cleared away. “Thanks a lot,” he said. “Of course
what I’d like best is to join his regiment.”

“Join his regiment?_you_!” Campton exclaimed.

“Oh, I know it’s difficult; I raced up from Biarritz quick as I could to
catch him.” He seemed still to be panting with the effort. “I want to be
in this,” he concluded.

Campton contemplated him with helpless perplexity. “But I don’t
understand?there’s no reason, in your case. With George it was
obligatory?on account of his being born here. But I suppose you were
born in America?”

“Well, I guess so: in Utica. My mother was Madeline Mayhew. I think
we’re a sort of cousins, sir, aren’t we?”

“Of course?of course. Excuse my not recalling it?just at first. But, my
dear boy, I still don’t see??”

Mr. Upsher’s powers of stating his case were plainly limited. He pushed
back his rumpled hair, looked hard again at his cousin, and repeated
doggedly: “I want to be _in_ this.”

“This war?”

He nodded.

Campton groaned. What did the boy mean, and why come to him with such
tomfoolery? At that moment he felt even more unfitted than usual to deal
with practical problems, and in spite of the forgotten cousinship it was
no affair of his what Madeline Mayhew’s son wanted to be in.

But there was the boy himself, stolid, immovable, impenetrable to hints,
and with something in his wide blue eyes like George?and yet so
childishly different.

“Sit down?have a cigarette, won’t you??You know, of course,” Campton
began, “that what you propose is almost insuperably difficult?”

“Getting into George’s regiment?”

“Getting into the French army at all?for a foreigner, a neutral ... I’m
afraid there’s really nothing I can do.”

Benny Upsher smiled indulgently. “I can fix that up all right; getting
into the army, I mean. The only thing that might be hard would be
getting into his regiment.”

“Oh, as to that?out of the question, I should think.” Campton was
conscious of speaking curtly: the boy’s bland determination was
beginning to get on his nerves.

“Thank you no end,” said Benny Upsher, getting up. “Sorry to have butted
in,” he added, holding out a large brown hand.

Campton followed him to the door perplexedly. He knew that something
ought to be done?but what? On the threshold he laid his hand impulsively
on the youth’s shoulder. “Look here, my boy, we’re cousins, as you say,
and if you’re Madeline Mayhew’s boy you’re an only son. Moreover you’re
George’s friend?which matters still more to me. I can’t let you go like
this. Just let me say a word to you before??”

A gleam of shrewdness flashed through Benny Upsher’s inarticulate blue
eyes. “A word or two _against_, you mean? Why, it’s awfully kind, but
not the least earthly use. I guess I’ve heard all the arguments. But all
I see is that hulking bully trying to do Belgium in. England’s coming
in, ain’t she? Well, then why ain’t we?”

“England? Why?why, there’s no analogy??”

The young man groped for the right word. “I don’t know. Maybe not. Only
in tight places we always _do_ seem to stand together.”

“You’re mad?this is not our war. Do you really want to go out and
butcher people?”

“Yes?this kind of people,” said Benny Upsher cheerfully. “You see, I’ve
had all this talk from Uncle Harvey Mayhew a good many times on the way
over. We came out on the same boat: he wanted me to be his private
secretary at the Hague Congress. But I was pretty sure I’d have a job of
my own to attend to.”

Campton still contemplated him hopelessly. “Where is your uncle?” he
wondered.

Benny grinned. “On his way to the Hague, I suppose.”

“He ought to be here to look after you?some one ought to!”

“Then you don’t see your way to getting me into George’s regiment?”
Benny simply replied.

An hour later Campton still seemed to see him standing there, with
obstinate soft eyes repeating the same senseless question. It cost him
an effort to shake off the vision.

He returned to the Crillon to collect his possessions. On his table was
a telegram, and he seized it eagerly, wondering if by some mad chance
George’s plans were changed, if he were being sent back, if Fortin had
already arranged something....

He tore open the message, and read: “Utica July thirty-first. No news
from Benny please do all you can to facilitate his immediate return to
America dreadfully anxious your cousin Madeline Upsher.”

“Good Lord!” Campton groaned?“and I never even asked the boy’s address!”




                                BOOK II




                                   X


The war was three months old?three centuries.

By virtue of some gift of adaptation which seemed forever to discredit
human sensibility, people were already beginning to live into the
monstrous idea of it, acquire its ways, speak its language, regard it as
a thinkable, endurable, arrangeable fact; to eat it by day, and sleep on
it?yes, and soundly?at night.

The war went on; life went on; Paris went on. She had had her great hour
of resistance, when, alone, exposed and defenceless, she had held back
the enemy and broken his strength. She had had, afterward, her hour of
triumph, the hour of the Marne; then her hour of passionate and
prayerful hope, when it seemed to the watching nations that the enemy
was not only held back but thrust back, and victory finally in reach.
That hour had passed in its turn, giving way to the grey reality of the
trenches. A new speech was growing up in this new world. There were
trenches now, there was a “Front”?people were beginning to talk of their
sons at the front.

The first time John Campton heard the phrase it sent a shudder through
him. Winter was coming on, and he was haunted by the vision of the
youths out there, boys of George’s age, thousands and thousands of them,
exposed by day in reeking wet ditches and sleeping at night under the
rain and snow. People were talking calmly of victory in the spring?the
spring that was still six long months away! And meanwhile, what cold and
wet, what blood and agony, what shattered bodies out on that hideous
front, what shattered homes in all the lands it guarded!

Campton could bear to think of these things now. _His_ son was not at
the front?was safe, thank God, and likely to remain so!

During the first awful weeks of silence and uncertainty, when every
morning brought news of a fresh disaster, when no letters came from the
army and no private messages could reach it?during those weeks, while
Campton, like other fathers, was without news of his son, the war had
been to him simply a huge featureless mass crushing him earthward,
blinding him, letting him neither think nor move nor breathe.

But at last he had got permission to go to Chalons, whither Fortin, who
chanced to have begun his career as a surgeon, had been hastily
transferred. The physician, called from his incessant labours in a
roughly-improvised operating-room, to which Campton was led between rows
of stretchers laden with livid blood-splashed men, had said kindly, but
with a shade of impatience, that he had not forgotten, had done what he
could; that George’s health did not warrant his being discharged from
the army, but that he was temporarily on a staff-job at the rear, and
would probably be kept there if such and such influences were brought to
bear. Then, calling for hot water and fresh towels, the surgeon vanished
and Campton made his way back with lowered eyes between the stretchers.

The “influences” in question were brought to bear?not without Anderson
Brant’s assistance?and now that George was fairly certain to be kept at
clerical work a good many miles from the danger-zone Campton felt less
like an ant under a landslide, and was able for the first time to think
of the war as he might have thought of any other war: objectively,
intellectually, almost dispassionately, as of history in the making.

It was not that he had any doubt as to the rights and wrongs of the
case. The painfully preserved equilibrium of the neutrals made a pitiful
show now that the monstrous facts of the first weeks were known:
Germany’s diplomatic perfidy, her savagery in the field, her
premeditated and systematized terrorizing of the civil populations.
Nothing could efface what had been done in Belgium and Luxembourg, the
burning of Louvain, the bombardment of Rheims. These successive outrages
had roused in Campton the same incredulous wrath as in the rest of
mankind; but being of a speculative mind?and fairly sure now that George
would never lie in the mud and snow with the others?he had begun to
consider the landslide in its universal relations, as well as in its
effects on his private ant-heap.

His son’s situation, however, was still his central thought. That this
lad, who was meant to have been born three thousand miles away in his
own safe warless country, and who was regarded by the government of that
country as having been born there, as subject to her laws and entitled
to her protection?that this lad, by the most idiotic of blunders, a
blunder perpetrated before he was born, should have been dragged into a
conflict in which he was totally unconcerned, should become temporarily
and arbitrarily the subject of a foreign state, exposed to whatever
catastrophes that state might draw upon itself, this fact still seemed
to Campton as unjust as when it first dawned on him that his boy’s very
life might hang on some tortuous secret negotiation between the cabinets
of Europe.

He still refused to admit that France had any claim on George, any right
to his time, to his suffering or to his life. He had argued it out a
hundred times with Adele Anthony. “You say Julia and I were to blame for
not going home before the boy was born?and God knows I agree with you!
But suppose we’d meant to go? Suppose we’d made every arrangement, taken
every precaution, as my parents did in my own case, got to Havre or
Cherbourg, say, and been told the steamer had broken her screw?or been
prevented ourselves, at the last moment, by illness or accident, or any
sudden grab of the Hand of God? You’ll admit we shouldn’t have been to
blame for that; yet the law would have recognized no difference. George
would still have found himself a French soldier on the second of last
August because, by the same kind of unlucky accident, he and I were born
on the wrong side of the Atlantic. And I say that’s enough to prove it’s
an iniquitous law, a travesty of justice. Nobody’s going to convince me
that, because a steamer may happen to break a phlange of her screw at
the wrong time, or a poor woman be frightened by a thunderstorm, France
has the right to force an American boy to go and rot in the trenches.”

“In the trenches?is George in the trenches?” Adele Anthony asked,
raising her pale eyebrows.

“No.” Campton thundered, his fist crashing down among her tea things;
“and all your word-juggling isn’t going to convince me that he ought to
be there.” He paused and stared furiously about the little ladylike
drawing-room into which Miss Anthony’s sharp angles were so
incongruously squeezed. She made no answer, and he went on: “George
looks at the thing exactly as I do.”

“Has he told you so?” Miss Anthony enquired, rescuing his teacup and
putting sugar into her own.

“He has told me nothing to the contrary. You don’t seem to be aware that
military correspondence is censored, and that a soldier can’t always
blurt out everything he thinks.”

Miss Anthony followed his glance about the room, and her eyes paused
with his on her own portrait, now in the place of honour over the
mantelpiece, where it hung incongruously above a menagerie of china
animals and a collection of trophies from the Marne.

“I dropped in at the Luxembourg yesterday,” she said. “Do you know whom
I saw there? Anderson Brant. He was looking at George’s portrait, and
turned as red as a beet. You ought to do him a sketch of George some
day?after this.”

Campton’s face darkened. He knew it was partly through Brant’s influence
that George had been detached from his regiment and given a staff job in
the Argonne; but Miss Anthony’s reminder annoyed him. The Brants had
acted through sheer selfish cowardice, the desire to safeguard something
which belonged to them, something they valued as they valued their
pictures and tapestries, though of course in a greater degree; whereas
he, Campton, was sustained by a principle which he could openly avow,
and was ready to discuss with any one who had the leisure to listen.

He had explained all this so often to Miss Anthony that the words rose
again to his lips without an effort. “If it had been a national issue I
should have wanted him to be among the first: such as our having to
fight Mexico, for instance??”

“Yes; or the moon. For my part, I understand Julia and Anderson better.
They don’t care a fig for national issues; they’re just animals
defending their cub.”

“_Their_?thank you!” Campton exclaimed.

“Well, poor Anderson really _was_ a dry-nurse to the boy. Who else was
there to look after him? You were painting Spanish beauties at the
time.” She frowned. “Life’s a puzzle. I see perfectly that if you’d let
everything else go to keep George you’d never have become the great John
Campton: the _real_ John Campton you were meant to be. And it wouldn’t
have been half as satisfactory for you?or for George either. Only, in
the meanwhile, somebody had to blow the child’s nose, and pay his
dentist and doctor; and you ought to be grateful to Anderson for doing
it. Aren’t there bees or ants, or something, that are kept for such
purposes?”

Campton’s lips were opened to reply when her face changed, and he saw
that he had ceased to exist for her. He knew the reason. That look came
over everybody’s face nowadays at the hour when the evening paper came.
The old maid-servant brought it in, and lingered to hear the
_communique_. At that hour, everywhere over the globe, business and
labour and pleasure (if it still existed) were suspended for a moment
while the hearts of all men gathered themselves up in a question and a
prayer.

Miss Anthony sought for her _lorgnon_ and failed to find it. With a
shaking hand she passed the newspaper over to Campton.

“Violent enemy attacks in the region of Dixmude, Ypres, Armentieres,
Arras, in the Argonne, and on the advanced slopes of the Grand Couronne
de Nancy, have been successfully repulsed. We have taken back the
village of Soupir, near Vailly (Aisne); we have taken Maucourt and
Mogeville, to the northeast of Verdun. Progress has been made in the
region of Vermelles (Pas-de-Calais), south of Aix Noulette. Enemy
attacks in the Hauts-de-Meuse and southeast of Saint-Mihiel have also
been repulsed.

“In Poland the Austrian retreat is becoming general. The Russians are
still advancing in the direction of Kielce-Sandomir and have progressed
beyond the San in Galicia. Mlawa has been reoccupied, and the whole
railway system of Poland is now controlled by the Russian forces.”

A good day?oh, decidedly a good day. At this rate, what became of the
gloomy forecasts of the people who talked of a winter in the trenches,
to be followed by a spring campaign? True, the Serbian army was still
retreating before superior Austrian forces?but there too the scales
would soon be turned if the Russians continued to progress. That day
there was hope everywhere: the old maid-servant went away smiling, and
Miss Anthony poured out another cup of tea.

Campton had not lifted his eyes from the paper. Suddenly they lit on a
short paragraph: “Fallen on the Field of Honour.” One had got used to
that with the rest; used even to the pang of reading names one knew,
evoking familiar features, young faces blotted out in blood, young limbs
convulsed in the fires of that hell called “the Front.” But this time
Campton turned pale and the paper fell to his knee.

“Fortin-Lescluze; Jean-Jacques-Marie, lieutenant of _Chasseurs a Pied_,
gloriously fallen for France....” There followed a ringing citation.

Fortin’s son, his only son, was dead.

Campton saw before him the honest _bourgeois_ dining-room, so strangely
out of keeping with the rest of the establishment; he saw the late
August sun slanting in on the group about the table, on the ambitious
and unscrupulous great man, the two quiet women hidden under his
illustrious roof, and the youth who had held together these three
dissimilar people, making an invisible home in the heart of all that
publicity. Campton remembered his brief exchange of words with Fortin on
the threshold, and the father’s uncontrollable outburst: “For his mother
and myself it’s not a trifle?having our only son in the war.”

Campton shut his eyes and leaned back, sick with the memory. This man
had had a share in saving George; but his own son he could not save.

“What’s the matter?” Miss Anthony asked, her hand on his arm.

Campton could not bring the name to his lips. “Nothing?nothing. Only
this room’s rather hot?and I must be off anyhow.” He got up, escaping
from her solicitude, and made his way out. He must go at once to
Fortin’s for news. The physician was still at Chalons; but there would
surely be some one at the house, and Campton could at least leave a
message and ask where to write.

Dusk had fallen. His eyes usually feasted on the beauty of the new
Paris, the secret mysterious Paris of veiled lights and deserted
streets; but to-night he was blind to it. He could see nothing but
Fortin’s face, hear nothing but his voice when he said: “Our only son in
the war.”

He groped along the pitch-black street for the remembered outline of the
house (since no house-numbers were visible), and rang several times
without result. He was just turning away when a big mud-splashed motor
drove up. He noticed a soldier at the steering-wheel, then three people
got out stiffly: two women smothered in crape and a haggard man in a
dirty uniform. Campton stopped, and Fortin-Lescluze recognized him by
the light of the motor-lamp. The four stood and looked at each other.
The old mother, under her crape, appeared no bigger than a child.

“Ah?you know?” the doctor said. Campton nodded.

The father spoke in a firm voice. “It happened three days ago?at
Suippes. You’ve seen his citation? They brought him in to me at Chalons
without a warning?and too late. I took off both legs, but gangrene had
set in. Ah?if I could have got hold of one of our big surgeons.... Yes,
we’re just back from the funeral.... My mother and my wife ... they had
that comfort....”

The two women stood beside him like shrouded statues. Suddenly Mme.
Fortin’s deep voice came through the crape: “You saw him, Monsieur, that
last day ... the day you came about your own son, I think?”

“I ... yes....” Campton stammered in anguish.

The physician intervened. “And, now, _ma bonne mere_, you’re not to be
kept standing. You’re to go straight in and take your _tisane_ and go to
bed.” He kissed his mother and pushed her into his wife’s arms.
“Goodbye, my dear. Take care of her.”

The women vanished under the porte-cochere, and Fortin turned to the
painter.

“Thank you for coming. I can’t ask you in?I must go back immediately.”

“Back?”

“To my work. Thank God. If it were not for that??”

He jumped into the motor, called out “_En route_,” and was absorbed into
the night.




                                   XI


Campton went home to his studio.

He still lived there, shiftlessly and uncomfortably?for Mariette had
never come back from Lille. She had not come back, and there was no news
of her. Lille had become a part of the “occupied provinces,” from which
there was no escape; and people were beginning to find out what that
living burial meant.

Adele Anthony had urged Campton to go back to the hotel, but he
obstinately refused. What business had he to be living in expensive
hotels when, for the Lord knew how long, his means of earning a
livelihood were gone, and when it was his duty to save up for
George?George, who was safe, who was definitely out of danger, and whom
he longed more than ever, when the war was over, to withdraw from the
stifling atmosphere of his stepfather’s millions?

He had been so near to having the boy to himself when the war broke out!
He had almost had in sight the proud day when he should be able to say:
“Look here: this is your own bank-account. Now you’re independent?for
God’s sake stop and consider what you want to do with your life.”

The war had put an end to that?but only for a time. If victory came
before long, Campton’s reputation would survive the eclipse, his chances
of money-making would be as great as ever, and the new George, the
George matured and disciplined by war, would come back with a finer
sense of values, and a soul steeled against the vulgar opportunities of
wealth.

Meanwhile, it behoved his father to save every penny. And the simplest
way of saving was to go on camping in the studio, taking his meals at
the nearest wine-shop, and entrusting his bed-making and dusting to old
Mme. Lebel. In that way he could live for a long time without
appreciably reducing his savings.

Mme. Lebel’s daughter-in-law, Mme. Jules, who was in the Ardennes with
the little girl when the war broke out, was to have replaced Mariette.
But, like Mariette, Mme. Jules never arrived, and no word came from her
or the child. They too were in an occupied province. So Campton jogged
on without a servant. It was very uncomfortable, even for his lax
standards; but the dread of letting a stranger loose in the studio made
him prefer to put up with Mme. Lebel’s intermittent services.

So far she had borne up bravely. Her orphan grandsons were all at the
front (how that word had insinuated itself into the language!) but she
continued to have fairly frequent reassuring news of them. The _Chasseur
Alpin_, slightly wounded in Alsace, was safe in hospital; and the others
were well, and wrote cheerfully. Her son Jules, the cabinetmaker, was
guarding a bridge at St. Cloud, and came in regularly to see her; but
Campton noticed that it was about him that she seemed most anxious.

He was a silent industrious man, who had worked hard to support his
orphaned nephews and his mother, and had married in middle age, only
four or five years before the war, when the lads could shift for
themselves, and his own situation was secure enough to permit the luxury
of a wife and baby.

Mme. Jules had waited patiently for him, though she had other chances;
and finally they had married and the baby had been born, and blossomed
into one of those finished little Frenchwomen who, at four or five, seem
already to be musing on the great central problems of love and thrift.
The parents used to bring the child to see Campton, and he had made a
celebrated sketch of her, in her Sunday bonnet, with little earrings and
a wise smile. And these two, mother and child, had disappeared on the
second of August as completely as if the earth had opened and swallowed
them.

As Campton entered he glanced at the old woman’s den, saw that it was
empty, and said to himself: “She’s at St. Cloud again.” For he knew that
she seized every chance of being with her eldest.

He unlocked his door and felt his way into the dark studio. Mme. Lebel
might at least have made up the fire! Campton lit the lamp, found some
wood, and knelt down stiffly by the stove. Really, life was getting too
uncomfortable....

He was trying to coax a flame when the door opened and he heard Mme.
Lebel.

“Really, you know??” he turned to rebuke her; but the words died on his
lips. She stood before him, taking no notice; then her shapeless black
figure doubled up, and she sank down into his own armchair. Mme. Lebel,
who, even when he offered her a seat, never did more than rest
respectful knuckles on its back!

“What’s the matter? What’s wrong?” he exclaimed.

She lifted her aged face. “Monsieur, I came about your fire; but I am
too unhappy. I have more than I can bear.” She fumbled vainly for a
handkerchief, and wiped away her tears with the back of her old
laborious hand.

“Jules has enlisted, Monsieur; enlisted in the infantry. He has left for
the front without telling me.”

“Good Lord. Enlisted? At his age?is he crazy?”

“No, Monsieur. But the little girl?he’s had news??”

She waited to steady her voice, and then fishing in another slit of her
multiple skirts, pulled out a letter. “I got that at midday. I hurried
to St. Cloud?but he left yesterday.”

The letter was grim reading. The poor father had accidentally run across
an escaped prisoner who had regained the French lines near the village
where Mme. Jules and the child were staying. The man, who knew the
wife’s family, had been charged by them with a message to the effect
that Mme. Jules, who was a proud woman, had got into trouble with the
authorities, and been sent off to a German prison on the charge of
spying. The poor little girl had cried and clung to her mother, and had
been so savagely pushed aside by the officer who made the arrest that
she had fallen on the stone steps of the “Kommandantur” and fractured
her skull. The fugitive reported her as still alive, but unconscious,
and dying.

Jules Lebel had received this news the previous day; and within
twenty-four hours he was at the front. Guard a bridge at St. Cloud after
that? All he asked was to kill and be killed. He knew the name and the
regiment of the officer who had denounced his wife. “If I live long
enough I shall run the swine down,” he wrote. “If not, I’ll kill as many
of his kind as God lets me.”

Mme. Lebel sat silent, her head bowed on her hands; and Campton stood
and watched her. Presently she got up, passed the back of her hand
across her eyes, and said: “The room is cold. I’ll fetch some coal.”

Campton protested. “No, no, Mme. Lebel. Don’t worry about me. Make
yourself something warm to drink, and try to sleep??”

“Oh, Monsieur, thank God for the work! If it were not for that??” she
said, in the same words as the physician.

She hobbled away, and presently he heard her bumping up again with the
coal.

When his fire was started, and the curtains drawn, and she had left him,
the painter sat down and looked about the studio. Bare and untidy as it
was, he did not find the sight unpleasant: he was used to it, and being
used to things seemed to him the first requisite of comfort. But
to-night his thoughts were elsewhere: he saw neither the tattered
tapestries with their huge heroes and kings, nor the blotched walls hung
with pictures, nor the canvases stacked against the chair-legs, nor the
long littered table at which he wrote and ate and mixed his colours. At
one moment he was with Fortin-Lescluze, speeding through the night
toward fresh scenes of death; at another, in the _loge_ downstairs,
where Mme. Lebel, her day’s work done, would no doubt sit down as usual
by her smoky lamp and go on with her sewing. “Thank God for the work??”
they had both said.

And here Campton sat with idle hands, and did nothing??

It was not exactly his fault. What was there for a portrait-painter to
do? He was not a portrait-painter only, and on his brief trip to Chalons
some of the scenes by the way?gaunt unshorn faces of territorials at
railway bridges, soldiers grouped about a provision-lorry, a
mud-splashed company returning to the rear, a long grey train of
“seventy-fives” ploughing forward through the rain?at these sights the
old graphic instinct had stirred in him. But the approaches of the front
were sternly forbidden to civilians, and especially to neutrals (Campton
was beginning to wince at the word); he himself, who had been taken to
Chalons by a high official of the Army Medical Board, had been given
only time enough for his interview with Fortin, and brought back to
Paris the same night. If ever there came a time for art to interpret the
war, as Raffet, for instance, had interpreted Napoleon’s campaigns, the
day was not yet; the world in which men lived at present was one in
which the word “art” had lost its meaning.

And what was Campton, what had he ever been, but an artist?... A father;
yes, he had waked up to the practice of that other art, he was learning
to be a father. And now, at a stroke, his only two reasons for living
were gone: since the second of August he had had no portraits to paint,
no son to guide and to companion.

Other people, he knew, had found jobs: most of his friends had been
drawn into some form of war-work. Dastrey, after vain attempts to
enlist, thwarted by an untimely sciatica, had found a post near the
front, on the staff of a Red Cross Ambulance. Adele Anthony was working
eight or nine hours a day in a Depot which distributed food and clothing
to refugees from the invaded provinces; and Mrs. Brant’s name figured on
the committees of most of the newly-organized war charities. Among
Campton’s other friends many had accepted humbler tasks. Some devoted
their time to listing and packing hospital supplies, keeping accounts in
ambulance offices, sorting out refugees at the railway-stations, and
telling them where to go for food and help; still others spent their
days, and sometimes their nights, at the bitter-cold suburban sidings
where the long train-loads of wounded stopped on the way to the
hospitals of the interior. There was enough misery and confusion at the
rear for every civilian volunteer to find his task.

Among them all, Campton could not see his place. His lameness put him at
a disadvantage, since taxicabs were few, and it was difficult for him to
travel in the crowded metro. He had no head for figures, and would have
thrown the best-kept accounts into confusion; he could not climb steep
stairs to seek out refugees, nor should he have known what to say to
them when he reached their attics. And so it would have been at the
railway canteens; he choked with rage and commiseration at all the
suffering about him, but found no word to cheer the sufferers.

Secretly, too, he feared the demands that would be made on him if he
once let himself be drawn into the network of war charities. Tiresome
women would come and beg for money, or for pictures for bazaars: they
were already getting up bazaars.

Money he could not spare, since it was his duty to save it for George;
and as for pictures?why, there were a few sketches he might give, but
here again he was checked by his fear of establishing a precedent. He
had seen in the papers that the English painters were already giving
blank canvases to be sold by auction to millionaires in quest of a
portrait. But that form of philanthropy would lead to his having to
paint all the unpaintable people who had been trying to bribe a picture
out of him since his sudden celebrity. No artist had a right to cheapen
his art in that way: it could only result in his turning out work that
would injure his reputation and reduce his sales after the war.

So far, Campton had not been troubled by many appeals for help; but that
was probably because he had kept out of sight, and thrown into the fire
the letters of the few ladies who had begged a sketch for their sales,
or his name for their committees.

One appeal, however, he had not been able to avoid. About two months
earlier he had had a visit from George’s friend Boylston, the youth he
had met at Dastrey’s dinner the night before war was declared. In the
interval he had entirely forgotten Boylston; but as soon as he saw the
fat brown young man with a twinkle in his eyes and his hair, Campton
recalled him, and held out a cordial hand. Had not George said that
Boylston was the best fellow he knew?

Boylston seemed much impressed by the honour of waiting on the great
man. In spite of his cool twinkling air he was evidently full of
reverence for the things and people he esteemed, and Campton’s welcome
sent the blood up to the edge of his tight curls. It also gave him
courage to explain his visit.

He had come to beg Campton to accept the chairmanship of the American
Committee of “The Friends of French Art,” an international group of
painters who proposed to raise funds for the families of mobilised
artists. The American group would naturally be the most active, since
Americans had, in larger numbers than any other foreigners, sought
artistic training in France; and all the members agreed that Campton’s
name must figure at their head. But Campton was known to be
inaccessible, and the committee, aware that Boylston was a friend of
George’s, had asked him to transmit their request.

“You see, sir, nobody else represents....”

Campton thought as seldom as possible of what followed: he hated the
part he had played. But, after all, what else could he have done?
Everything in him recoiled from what acceptance would bring with it:
publicity, committee meetings, speechifying, writing letters, seeing
troublesome visitors, hearing harrowing stories, asking people for
money?above all, having to give his own; a great deal of his own.

He stood before the young man, abject, irresolute, chinking a bunch of
keys in his trouser-pocket, and remembering afterward that the chink
must have sounded as if it were full of money. He remembered too, oddly
enough, that as his own embarrassment increased Boylston’s vanished. It
was as though the modest youth, taking his host’s measure, had
reluctantly found him wanting, and from that moment had felt less in awe
of his genius. Illogical, of course, and unfair?but there it was.

The talk had ended by Campton’s refusing the chairmanship, but agreeing
to let his name figure on the list of honorary members, where he hoped
it would be overshadowed by rival glories. And, having reached this
conclusion, he had limped to his desk, produced a handful of notes, and
after a moment’s hesitation held out two hundred francs with the
stereotyped: “Sorry I can’t make it more....”

He had meant it to be two hundred and fifty; but, with his usual luck,
all his fumbling had failed to produce a fifty-franc note; and he could
hardly ask Boylston to “make the change.”

On the threshold the young man paused to ask for the last news of
George; and on Campton’s assuring him that it was excellent, added, with
evident sincerity: “Still hung up on that beastly staff-job? I do call
that hard luck??” And now, of all the unpleasant memories of the visit,
that phrase kept the sharpest sting.

Was it in fact hard luck? And did George himself think so? There was
nothing in his letters to show it. He seemed to have undergone no change
of view as to his own relation to the war; he had shown no desire to “be
in it,” as that mad young Upsher said.

For the first time since he had seen George’s train pull out of the Gare
de l’Est Campton found himself wondering at the perfection of his son’s
moral balance. So many things had happened since; war had turned out to
be so immeasurably more hideous and abominable than those who most
abhorred war had dreamed it could be; the issues at stake had become so
glaringly plain, right and wrong, honour and dishonour, humanity and
savagery faced each other so squarely across the trenches, that it
seemed strange to Campton that his boy, so eager, so impressionable, so
quick on the uptake, should not have felt some such burst of wrath as
had driven even poor Jules Lebel into the conflict.

The comparison, of course, was absurd. Lebel had been parted from his
dearest, his wife dragged to prison, his child virtually murdered: any
man, in his place, must have felt the blind impulse to kill. But what
was Lebel’s private plight but a symbol of the larger wrong? This war
could no longer be compared to other wars: Germany was conducting it on
methods that civilization had made men forget. The occupation of
Luxembourg; the systematic destruction of Belgium; the savage treatment
of the people of the invaded regions; the outrages of Louvain and Rheims
and Ypres; the voice with which these offences cried to heaven had waked
the indignation of humanity. Yet George, in daily contact with all this
woe and ruin, seemed as unmoved as though he had been behind a desk in
the New York office of Bullard and Brant.

If there were any change in his letters it was rather that they were
more indifferent. His reports of himself became drier, more stereotyped,
his comments on the situation fewer: he seemed to have been subdued to
the hideous business he worked in. It was true that his letters had
never been expressive: his individuality seemed to dry up in contact
with pen and paper. It was true also that letters from the front were
severely censored, and that it would have been foolish to put in them
anything likely to prevent their delivery. But George had managed to
send several notes by hand, and these were as colourless as the others;
and so were his letters to his mother, which Mrs. Brant always sent to
Miss Anthony, who privately passed them on to Campton.

Besides, there were other means of comparison. People with sons at the
front were beginning to hand about copies of their letters; a few
passages, strangely moving and beautiful, had found their way into the
papers. George, God be praised, was not at the front; but he was in the
war-zone, far nearer the sights and sounds of death than his father, and
he had comrades and friends in the trenches. Strange that what he wrote
was still so cold to the touch....

“It’s the scientific mind, I suppose,” Campton reflected. “These
youngsters are all rather like beautifully made machines....” Yet it had
never before struck him that his son was like a beautifully made
machine.

He remembered that he had not dined, and got up wearily. As he passed
out he noticed on a pile of letters and papers a brand-new card: he
could always tell the new cards by their whiteness, which twenty-four
hours of studio-dust turned to grey.

Campton held the card to the light. It was large and glossy, a beautiful
thick pre-war card; and on it was engraved:

                             HARVEY MAYHEW
             _Delegue des Etats Unis au Congres de la Paix_

with a pen-stroke through the lower line. Beneath was written an
imperative “p.t.o.”; and reversing the card, Campton read, in an
agitated hand: “Must see you at once. Call up Nouveau Luxe”; and, lower
down: “Excuse ridiculous card. Impossible get others under six weeks.”

So Mayhew had turned up! Well, it was a good thing: perhaps he might
bring news of that mad Benny Upsher whose doings had caused Campton so
much trouble in the early days that he could never recall the boy’s
obstinate rosy face without a stir of irritation.

“I want to be _in_ this thing??” Well, young Upsher had apparently been
in it with a vengeance; but what he had cost Campton in cables to his
distracted family, and in weary pilgrimages to the War Office, the
American Embassy, the Consulate, the Prefecture of Police, and divers
other supposed sources of information, the painter meant some day to
tell his young relative in no measured terms. That is, if the chance
ever presented itself; for, since he had left the studio that morning
four months ago, Benny had so completely vanished that Campton sometimes
wondered, with a little shiver, if they were ever likely to exchange
words again in this world.

“Mayhew will know; he wants to tell me about the boy, I suppose,” he
mused.

Harvey Mayhew?Harvey Mayhew with a pen-stroke through the title which,
so short a time since, it had been his chief ambition to display on his
cards! No wonder it embarrassed him now. But where on earth had he been
all this time? As Campton pondered on the card a memory flashed out.
Mayhew? Mayhew? Why, wasn’t it Mayhew who had waylaid him in the Crillon
a few hours before war was declared, to ask his advice about the safest
way of travelling to the Hague? And hadn’t he, Campton, in all good
faith, counselled him to go by Luxembourg “in order to be out of the way
of trouble”?

The remembrance swept away the painter’s sombre thoughts, and he burst
into a laugh that woke the echoes of the studio.




                                  XII


Not having it in his power to call up his cousin on the telephone,
Campton went the next morning to the Nouveau Luxe.

It was the first time that he had entered the famous hotel since the
beginning of the war; and at sight of the long hall his heart sank as it
used to whenever some untoward necessity forced him to run its deadly
blockade.

But the hall was empty when he entered, empty not only of the brilliant
beings who filled his soul with such dismay, but also of the porters,
footmen and lift-boys who, even in its unfrequented hours, lent it the
lustre of their liveries.

A tired concierge sat at the desk, and near the door a boy scout,
coiling his bare legs about a high stool, raised his head languidly from
his book. But for these two, the world of the Nouveau Luxe had
disappeared.

As the lift was not running there was nothing to disturb their
meditations; and when Campton had learned that Mr. Mayhew would receive
him he started alone up the deserted stairs.

Only a few dusty trunks remained in the corridors where luggage used to
be piled as high as in the passages of the great liners on sailing-day;
and instead of the murmur of ladies’-maids’ skirts, and explosions of
laughter behind glazed service-doors, the swish of a charwoman’s mop
alone broke the silence.

“After all,” Campton thought, “if war didn’t kill people how much
pleasanter it might make the world!”

This was evidently not the opinion of Mr. Harvey Mayhew, whom he found
agitatedly pacing a large room hung in shrimp-pink brocade, which opened
on a vista of turquoise tiling and porcelain tub.

Mr. Mayhew’s round countenance, composed of the same simple curves as
his nephew’s, had undergone a remarkable change. He was still round, but
he was ravaged. His fringe of hair had grown greyer, and there were
crow’s-feet about his blue eyes, and wrathful corrugations in his
benignant forehead.

He seized Campton’s hands and glared at him through indignant
eye-glasses.

“My dear fellow, I looked you up as soon as I arrived. I need you?we all
need you?we need your powerful influence and your world-wide celebrity.
Campton, the day for words has gone by. We must _act_!”

Campton let himself down into an armchair. No verb in the language
terrified him as much as that which his cousin had flung at him. He
gazed at the ex-Delegate with dismay. “I didn’t know you were here.
Where have you come from?” he asked.

Mr. Mayhew, resting a manicured hand on the edge of a gilt table, looked
down awfully on him.

“I come,” he said, “from a German prison.”

“Good Lord?_you_?” Campton gasped.

He continued to gaze at his cousin with terror, but of a new kind. Here
at last was someone who had actually been in the jaws of the monster,
who had seen, heard, suffered?a witness who could speak of that which he
knew! No wonder Mr. Mayhew took himself seriously?at last he had
something to be serious about! Campton stared at him as if he had risen
from the dead.

Mr. Mayhew cleared his throat and went on: “You may remember our meeting
at the Crillon?on the 31st of last July it was?and my asking you the
best way of getting to the Hague, in view of impending events. At that
time” (his voice took a note of irony) “I was a Delegate to the Peace
Congress at the Hague, and conceived it to be my duty to carry out my
mandate at whatever personal risk. You advised me?as you may also
remember?in order to be out of the way of trouble, to travel by
Luxembourg,” (Campton stirred uneasily). “I followed your advice; and,
not being able to go by train, I managed, with considerable difficulty,
to get permission to travel by motor. I reached Luxembourg as the German
army entered it?the next day I was in a German prison.”

The next day! Then this pink-and-white man who stood there with his
rimless eye-glasses and neatly trimmed hair, and his shining nails
reflected in the plate glass of the table-top, this perfectly typical,
usual sort of harmless rich American, had been for four months in the
depths of the abyss that men were beginning to sound with fearful
hearts!

“It is a simple miracle,” said Mr. Mayhew, “that I was not shot as a
spy.”

Campton’s voice choked in his throat. “Where were you imprisoned?”

“The first night, in the Police commissariat, with common thieves and
vagabonds?with?” Mr. Mayhew lowered his voice and his eyes: “With
prostitutes, Campton....”

He waited for this to take effect, and continued: “The next day, in
consequence of the energetic intervention of our consul?who behaved
extremely well, as I have taken care to let them know in Washington?I
was sent back to my hotel on parole, and kept there, kept there,
Campton?_I_, the official representative of a friendly country?under
strict police surveillance, like ... like an unfortunate woman ... for
eight days: a week and one day over!”

Mr. Mayhew sank into a chair and passed a scented handkerchief across
his forehead. “When I was finally released I was without money, without
luggage, without my motor or my wretched chauffeur?a Frenchman, who had
been instantly carried off to Germany. In this state of destitution, and
without an apology, I was shipped to Rotterdam and put on a steamer
sailing for America.” He wiped his forehead again, and the corners of
his agitated lips. “Peace, Campton?_Peace_? When I think that I believed
in a thing called Peace! That I left Utica?always a difficult
undertaking for me?because I deemed it my duty, in the interests of
_Peace_,” (the word became a hiss) “to travel to the other side of the
world, and use the weight of my influence and my experience in such a
cause!”

He clenched his fist and shook it in the face of an invisible foe.

“My influence, if I have any; my experience?ha, I _have_ had experience
now, Campton! And, my God, sir, they shall both be used till my last
breath to show up these people, to proclaim to the world what they
really are, to rouse public opinion in America against a nation of
savages who ought to be hunted off the face of the globe like
vermin?like the vermin in their own prison cells! Campton?if I may say
so without profanity?I come to bring not Peace but a Sword!”

It was some time before the flood of Mr. Mayhew’s wrath subsided, or
before there floated up from its agitated depths some fragments of his
subsequent history and present intentions. Eventually, however, Campton
gathered that after a short sojourn in America, where he found opinion
too lukewarm for him, he had come back to Europe to collect the
experiences of other victims of German savagery. Mr. Mayhew, in short,
meant to devote himself to Atrocities; and he had sought out Campton to
ask his help, and especially to be put in contact with persons engaged
in refugee-work, and likely to have come across flagrant offences
against the law of nations.

It was easy to comply with the latter request. Campton scribbled a
message to Adele Anthony at her refugee Depot; and he undertook also to
find out from what officials Mr. Mayhew might obtain leave to visit the
front.

“I know it’s difficult??” he began; but Mr. Mayhew laughed. “I am here
to surmount difficulties?after what I’ve been through!”

It was not until then that Mr. Mayhew found time to answer an enquiry
about his nephew.

“Benny Upsher ? Ha?I’m proud of Benny! He’s a hero, that nephew of
mine?he was always my favourite.”

He went on to say that the youth, having failed to enlist in the French
army, had managed to get back to England, and there, passing himself off
as a Canadian (“Born at Murray Bay, sir?wasn’t it lucky?”) had joined an
English regiment, and, after three months’ training, was now on his way
to the front. His parents had made a great outcry?moved heaven and earth
for news of him?but the boy had covered up his tracks so cleverly that
they had had no word till he was starting for Boulogne with his draft.
Rather high-handed?and poor Madeline had nearly gone out of her mind;
but Mr. Mayhew confessed he had no patience with such feminine weakness.
“Benny’s a man, and must act as a man. That boy, Campton, saw things as
they were from the first.”

Campton took leave, dazed and crushed by the conversation. It was all
one to him if Harvey Mayhew chose to call on America to avenge his
wrongs; Campton himself was beginning to wish that his country would
wake up to what was going on in the world; but that he, Campton, should
be drawn into the affair, should have to write letters, accompany the
ex-Delegate to Embassies and Red Crosses, languish with him in
ministerial antechambers, and be deafened with appeals to his own
celebrity and efficiency; that he should have ascribed to himself that
mysterious gift of “knowing the ropes” in which his whole blundering
career had proved him to be cruelly lacking: this was so dreadful to him
as to obscure every other question.

“Thank the Lord,” he muttered, “I haven’t got the telephone anyhow!”

He glanced cautiously down the wide stairs of the hotel to assure
himself of a safe retreat; but in the hall an appealing voice detained
him.

“Dear Master! Dear great Master! I’ve been lying in wait for you!”

A Red Cross nurse advanced: not the majestic figure of the Crimean
legend, but the new version evolved in the rue de la Paix: short skirts,
long ankles, pearls and curls. The face under the coif was young,
wistful, haggard with the perpetual hurry of the aimless. Where had he
seen those tragic eyes, so full of questions and so invariably
uninterested in the answers?

“I’m Madge Talkett?I saw you at?I saw you the day war was declared,” the
young lady corrected herself. Campton remembered their meeting at Mrs.
Brant’s, and was grateful for her evident embarrassment. So few of the
new generation seemed aware that there were any privacies left to
respect! He looked at Mrs. Talkett more kindly.

“You _must_ come,” she continued, laying her hand on his arm (her
imperatives were always in italics). “Just a step from here?to my
hospital. There’s someone asking for you.”

“For me? Someone wounded?” What if it were Benny Upsher? A cold fear
broke over Campton.

“Someone dying,” Mrs. Talkett said. “Oh, nobody you know?a poor young
French soldier. He was brought here two days ago ... and he keeps on
repeating your name....”

“My name? Why my name?”

“We don’t know. We don’t think he knows you ... but he’s shot to pieces
and half delirious. He’s a painter, and he’s seen pictures of yours, and
keeps talking about them, and saying he wants you to look at his.... You
_will_ come? It’s just next door, you know.”

He did not know?having carefully avoided all knowledge of hospitals in
his dread of being drawn into war-work, and his horror of coming as a
mere spectator to gaze on agony he could neither comfort nor relieve.
Hospitals were for surgeons and women; if he had been rich he would have
given big sums to aid them; being unable to do even that, he preferred
to keep aloof.

He followed Mrs. Talkett out of the hotel and around the corner. The
door of another hotel, with a big Red Cross above it, admitted them to a
marble vestibule full of the cold smell of disinfectants. An orderly sat
reading a newspaper behind the desk, and nurses whisked backward and
forward with trays and pails. A lady with a bunch of flowers came down
the stairs drying her eyes.

Campton’s whole being recoiled from what awaited him. Since the poor
youth was delirious, what was the use of seeing him? But women took a
morbid pleasure in making one do things that were useless!

On an upper floor they paused at a door where there was a moment’s
parleying.

“Come,” Mrs. Talkett said; “he’s a little better.”

The room contained two beds. In one lay a haggard elderly man with
closed eyes and lips drawn back from his clenched teeth. His legs
stirred restlessly, and one of his arms was in a lifted sling attached
to a horrible kind of gallows above the bed. It reminded Campton of Juan
de Borgona’s pictures of the Inquisition, in the Prado.

“Oh, _he’s_ all right; he’ll get well. It’s the other....”

The other lay quietly in his bed. No gallows overhung him, no visible
bandaging showed his wound. There was a flush on his young cheeks and
his eyes looked out, large and steady, from their hollow brows. But he
was the one who would not get well.

Mrs. Talkett bent over him: her voice was sweet when it was lowered.

“I’ve kept my promise. Here he is.”

The eyes turned in the lad’s immovable head, and he and Campton looked
at each other. The painter had never seen the face before him: a sharp
irregular face, prematurely hollowed by pain, with thick chestnut hair
tumbled above the forehead.

“It’s you, Master!” the boy said.

Campton sat down beside him. “How did you know? Have you seen me
before?”

“Once?at one of your exhibitions.” He paused and drew a hard breath.
“But the first thing was the portrait at the Luxembourg ... your
son....”

“Ah, you look like him!” Campton broke out.

The eyes of the young soldier lit up. “Do I?... Someone told me he was
your son. I went home from seeing that and began to paint. After the
war, would you let me come and work with you? My things ... wait ...
I’ll show you my things first.” He tried to raise himself. Mrs. Talkett
slipped her arm under his shoulders, and resting against her he lifted
his hand and pointed to the bare wall facing him.

“There?there; you see? Look for yourself. The brushwork ... not too bad,
eh? I was ... getting it.... There, that head of my grandfather, eh? And
my lame sister.... Oh, I’m young ...” he smiled ... “never had any
models.... But after the war you’ll see....”

Mrs. Talkett let him down again, and feverishly, vehemently, he began to
describe, one by one, and over and over again, the pictures he saw on
the naked wall in front of him.

A nurse had slipped in, and Mrs. Talkett signed to Campton to follow her
out. The boy seemed aware that the painter was going, and interrupted
his enumeration to say: “As soon as the war’s over you’ll let me come?”

“Of course I will,” Campton promised.

In the passage he asked: “Can nothing save him? Has everything possible
been done?”

“Everything. We’re all so fond of him?the biggest surgeons have seen
him. It seems he has great talent?but he never could afford models, so
he has painted his family over and over again.” Mrs. Talkett looked at
Campton with a good deal of feeling in her changing eyes. “You see, it
_did_ help, your coming. I know you thought it tiresome of me to
insist.” She led him downstairs and into the office, where a lame
officer with the Croix de Guerre sat at the desk. The officer wrote out
the young soldier’s name?Rene Davril?and his family’s address.

“They’re quite destitute, Monsieur. An old infirm grandfather, a lame
sister who taught music, a widowed mother and several younger
children....”

“I’ll come back, I’ll come back,” Campton again promised as he parted
from Mrs. Talkett.

He had not thought it possible that he would ever feel so kindly toward
her as at that moment. And then, a second later, she nearly spoiled it
by saying: “Dear Master?you see the penalty of greatness!”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The name of Rene Davril was with Campton all day. The boy had believed
in him?his eyes had been opened by the sight of George’s portrait! And
now, in a day or two more, he would be filling a three-by-six ditch in a
crowded graveyard. At twenty?and with eyes like George’s.

What could Campton do? No one was less visited by happy inspirations;
the “little acts of kindness” recommended to his pious infancy had
always seemed to him far harder to think of than to perform. But now
some instinct carried him straight to the corner of his studio where he
remembered having shoved out of sight a half-finished study for George’s
portrait. He found it, examined it critically, scribbled his signature
in one corner, and set out with it for the hospital. On the way he had
to stop at the Ministry of War on Mayhew’s tiresome business, and was
delayed there till too late to proceed with his errand before luncheon.
But in the afternoon he passed in again through the revolving plate
glass, and sent up his name. Mrs. Talkett was not there, but a nurse
came down, to whom, with embarrassment, he explained himself.

“Poor little Davril? Yes?he’s still alive. Will you come up? His family
are with him.”

Campton shook his head and held out the parcel. “It’s a picture he
wanted??”

The nurse promised it should be given. She looked at Campton with a
vague benevolence, having evidently never heard his name; and the
painter turned away with a cowardly sense that he ought to have taken
the picture up himself. But to see the death-change on a face so like
his son’s, and its look reflected in other anguished faces, was more
than he could endure. He turned away.

The next morning Mrs. Talkett wrote that Rene Davril was better, that
the fever had dropped, and that he was lying quietly looking at the
sketch. “The only thing that troubles him is that he realizes now that
you have not seen his pictures. But he is very happy, and blesses you
for your goodness.”

His goodness! Campton, staring at the letter, could only curse himself
for his stupidity. He saw now that the one thing which might have
comforted the poor lad would have been to have his own pictures seen and
judged; and that one thing, he, Campton, so many years vainly athirst
for the approbation of the men he revered?that one thing he had never
thought of doing! The only way of atoning for his negligence was
instantly to go out to the suburb where the Davril family lived.
Campton, without a scruple, abandoned Mr. Mayhew, with whom he had an
appointment at the Embassy and another at the War Office, and devoted
the rest of the day to the expedition. It was after six when he reached
the hospital again; and when Mrs. Talkett came down he went up to her
impetuously.

“Well?I’ve seen them; I’ve seen his pictures, and he’s right. They’re
astonishing! Awkward, still, and hesitating; but with such a sense of
air and mass. He’ll do things?May I go up and tell him?”

He broke off and looked at her.

“He died an hour ago. If only you’d seen them yesterday!” she said.




                                  XIII


The killing of Rene Davril seemed to Campton one of the most senseless
crimes the war had yet perpetrated. It brought home to him, far more
vividly than the distant death of poor Jean Fortin, what an incalculable
sum of gifts and virtues went to make up the monster’s daily meal.

“Ah, you want genius, do you? Mere youth’s not enough ... and health and
gaiety and courage; you want brains in the bud, imagination and poetry,
ideas all folded up in their sheath! It takes that, does it, to tempt
your jaded appetite?” He was reminded of the rich vulgarians who will
eat only things out of season. “That’s what war is like,” he muttered
savagely to himself.

The next morning he went to the funeral with Mrs. Talkett?between whom
and himself the tragic episode had created a sort of improvised
intimacy?walking at her side through the November rain, behind the poor
hearse with the tricolour over it.

At the church, while the few mourners shivered in a damp side chapel, he
had time to study the family: a poor sobbing mother, two anæmic little
girls, and the lame sister who was musical?a piteous group, smelling of
poverty and tears. Behind them, to his surprise, he saw the curly brown
head and short-sighted eyes of Boylston. Campton wondered at the
latter’s presence; then he remembered “The Friends of French Art,” and
concluded that the association had probably been interested in poor
Davril.

With some difficulty he escaped from the thanks of the mother and
sisters, and picked up a taxi to take Mrs. Talkett home.

“No?back to the hospital,” she said. “A lot of bad cases have come in,
and I’m on duty again all day.” She spoke as if it were the most natural
thing in the world; and he shuddered at the serenity with which women
endure the unendurable.

At the hospital he followed her in. The Davril family, she told him, had
insisted that they had no claim on his picture, and that it must be
returned to him. Mrs. Talkett went up to fetch it; and Campton waited in
one of the drawing-rooms. A step sounded behind him, and another nurse
came in?but was it a nurse, or some haloed nun from a Umbrian triptych,
her pure oval framed in white, her long fingers clasping a book and
lily?

“Mme. de Dolmetsch!” he cried; and thought: “A new face again?what an
artist!”

She seized his hands.

“I heard from dear Madge Talkett that you were here, and I’ve asked her
to leave us together.” She looked at him with ravaged eyes, as if just
risen from a penitential vigil.

“Come, please, into my little office: you didn’t know that I was the
_Infirmiere-Major_? My dear friend, what upheavals, what cataclysms! I
see no one now: all my days and nights are given to my soldiers.”

She glided ahead on noiseless sandals to a little room where a bowl of
jade filled with gardenias, and a tortoise-shell box of gold-tipped
cigarettes, stood on a desk among torn and discoloured _livrets
militaires_. The room was empty, and Mme. de Dolmetsch, closing the
door, drew Campton to a seat at her side. So close to her, he saw that
the perfect lines of her face were flawed by marks of suffering. “The
woman really has a heart,” he thought, “or the war couldn’t have made
her so much handsomer.”

Mme. de Dolmetsch leaned closer: a breath of incense floated from her
conventual draperies.

“I know why you came,” she continued; “you were good to that poor little
Davril.” She clutched Campton suddenly with a blue-veined hand. “My dear
friend, can anything justify such horrors? Isn’t it abominable that boys
like that should be murdered? That some senile old beast of a
diplomatist should decree, after a good dinner, that all we love best
must be offered up?” She caught his hands again, her liturgical scent
enveloping him. “Campton, I know you feel as I do.” She paused, pressing
his fingers hard, her beautiful mouth trembling. “For God’s sake tell
me,” she implored, “how you’ve managed to keep your son from the front!”

Campton drew away, red and inarticulate. “I?my son? Those things depend
on the authorities. My boy’s health....” he stammered.

“Yes, yes; I know. Your George is delicate. But so is my
Ladislas?dreadfully. The lungs too. I’ve trembled for him for so long;
and now, at any moment....” Two tears gathered on her long lashes and
rolled down ... “at any moment he may be taken from the War Office,
where he’s doing invaluable work, and forced into all that blood and
horror; he may be brought back to me like those poor creatures upstairs,
who are hardly men any longer ... mere vivisected animals, without eyes,
without faces.” She lowered her voice and drew her lids together, so
that her very eyes seemed to be whispering. “Ladislas has enemies who
are jealous of him (I could give you their names); at this moment
someone who ought to be at the front is intriguing to turn him out and
get his place. Oh, Campton, you’ve known this terror?you know what one’s
nights are like! Have pity?tell me how you managed!”

He had no idea of what he answered, or how he finally got away.
Everything that was dearest to him, the thought of George, the vision of
the lad dying upstairs, was defiled by this monstrous coupling of their
names with that of the supple middle-aged adventurer safe in his
spotless uniform at the War Office. And beneath the boiling-up of
Campton’s disgust a new fear lifted its head. How did Mme. de Dolmetsch
know about George? And what did she know? Evidently there had been
foolish talk somewhere. Perhaps it was Mrs. Brant?or perhaps Fortin
himself. All these great doctors forgot the professional secret with
some one woman, if not with many. Had not Fortin revealed to his own
wife the reason of Campton’s precipitate visit? The painter escaped from
Mme. de Dolmetsch’s scented lair, and from the sights and sounds of the
hospital, in a state of such perturbation that for a while he stood in
the street wondering where he had meant to go next.

He had his own reasons for agreeing to the Davrils’ suggestion that the
picture should be returned to him; and presently these reasons came
back. “They’d never dare to sell it themselves; but why shouldn’t I sell
it for them?” he had thought, remembering their denuded rooms, and the
rusty smell of the women’s mourning. It cost him a pang to part with a
study of his boy; but he was in a superstitious and expiatory mood, and
eager to act on it.

He remembered having been told by Boylston that “The Friends of French
Art” had their office in the Palais Royal, and he made his way through
the deserted arcades to the door of a once-famous restaurant.

Behind the plate-glass windows young women with rolled-up sleeves and
straw in their hair were delving in packing-cases, while, divided from
them by an improvised partition, another group were busy piling on the
cloak-room shelves garments such as had never before dishonoured them.

Campton stood fascinated by the sight of the things these young women
were sorting: pink silk combinations, sporting ulsters in glaring black
and white checks, straw hats wreathed with last summer’s sunburnt
flowers, high-heeled satin shoes split on the instep, and fringed and
bugled garments that suggested obsolete names like “dolman” and
“mantle,” and looked like the costumes dug out of a country-house attic
by amateurs preparing to play “Caste.” Was it possible that “The Friends
of French Art” proposed to clothe the families of fallen artists in
these prehistoric properties?

Boylston appeared, flushed and delighted (and with straw in his hair
also), and led his visitor up a corkscrew stair. They passed a room
where a row of people in shabby mourning like that of the Davril family
sat on restaurant chairs before a _caissiere’s_ desk; and at the desk
Campton saw Miss Anthony, her veil pushed back and a card-catalogue at
her elbow, listening to a young woman who was dramatically stating her
case.

Boylston saw Campton’s surprise, and said: “Yes, we’re desperately
short-handed, and Miss Anthony has deserted her refugees for a day or
two to help me to straighten things out.”

His own office was in a faded _cabinet particulier_ where the
dinner-table had been turned into a desk, and the weak-springed divan
was weighed down under suits of ready-made clothes bearing the label of
a wholesale clothier.

“These are the things we really give them; but they cost a lot of money
to buy,” Boylston explained. On the divan sat a handsomely dressed
elderly lady with a long emaciated face and red eyes, who rose as they
entered. Boylston spoke to her in an undertone and led her into another
_cabinet_, where Campton saw her tragic figure sink down on the sofa,
under a glass scrawled with amorous couplets.

“That was Mme. Beausite.... You didn’t recognize her? Poor thing! Her
youngest boy is blind: his eyes were put out by a shell. She is very
unhappy, and she comes here and helps now and then. Beausite? Oh no, we
never see _him_. He’s only our Honorary President.”

Boylston obviously spoke without afterthought; but Campton felt the
sting. He too was on the honorary committee.

“Poor woman! What? The young fellow who did Cubist things? I hadn’t
heard....” He remembered the cruel rumour that Beausite, when his glory
began to wane, had encouraged his three sons in three different lines of
art, so that there might always be a Beausite in the fashion.... “You
must have to listen to pretty ghastly stories here,” he said.

The young man nodded, and Campton, with less embarrassment than he had
expected, set forth his errand. In that atmosphere it seemed natural to
be planning ways of relieving misery, and Boylston at once put him at
his ease by looking pleased but not surprised.

“You mean to sell the sketch, sir? That will put the Davrils out of
anxiety for a long time; and they’re in a bad way, as you saw.” Boylston
undid the parcel, with a respectful: “May I?” and put the canvas on a
chair. He gazed at it for a few moments, the blood rising sensitively
over his face till it reached his tight ridge of hair. Campton
remembered what George had said of his friend’s silent admirations; he
was glad the young man did not speak.

When he did, it was to say with a businesslike accent: “We’re trying to
get up an auction of pictures and sketches?and if we could lead off with
this....”

It was Campton’s turn to redden. The possibility was one he had not
thought of. If the picture were sold at auction, Anderson Brant would be
sure to buy it! But he could not say this to Boylston. He hesitated, and
the other, who seemed quick at feeling his way, added at once: “But
perhaps you’d rather sell it privately? In that case we should get the
money sooner.”

It was just the right thing to say: and Campton thanked him and picked
up his sketch. At the door he hesitated, feeling that it became a member
of the honorary committee to add something more.

“How are you getting on? Getting all the help you need?”

Boylston smiled. “We need such a lot. People have been very generous:
we’ve had several big sums. But look at those ridiculous clothes
downstairs?we get boxes and boxes of such rubbish! And there are so many
applicants, and such hard cases. Take those poor Davrils, for instance.
The lame Davril girl has a talent for music: plays the violin. Well,
what good does it do her now? The artists are having an awful time. If
this war goes on much longer, it won’t be only at the front that they’ll
die.”

“Ah??” said Campton. “Well, I’ll take this to a dealer??”

On the way down he turned in to greet Miss Anthony. She looked up in
surprise, her tired face haloed in tumbling hairpins; but she was too
busy to do more than nod across the group about her desk.

At his offer to take her home she shook her head. “I’m here till after
seven. Mr. Boylston and I are nearly snowed under. We’ve got to go down
presently and help unpack; and after that I’m due at my refugee canteen
at the Nord. It’s my night shift.”

Campton, on the way back to Montmartre, fell to wondering if such
excesses of altruism were necessary, or a mere vain overflow of energy.
He was terrified by his first close glimpse of the ravages of war, and
the efforts of the little band struggling to heal them seemed pitifully
ineffectual. No doubt they did good here and there, made a few lives
less intolerable; but how the insatiable monster must laugh at them as
he spread his red havoc wider!

On reaching home, Campton forgot everything at sight of a letter from
George. He had not had one for two weeks, and this interruption, just as
the military mails were growing more regular, had made him anxious. But
it was the usual letter: brief, cheerful, inexpressive. Apparently there
was no change in George’s situation, nor any wish on his part that there
should be. He grumbled humorously at the dulness of his work and the
monotony of life in a war-zone town; and wondered whether, if this sort
of thing went on, there might not soon be some talk of leave. And just
at the end of his affectionate and unsatisfactory two pages, Campton lit
on a name that roused him.

“I saw a fellow who’d seen Benny Upsher yesterday on his way to the
English front. The young lunatic looked very fit. You know he
volunteered in the English army when he found he couldn’t get into the
French. He’s likely to get all the fighting he wants.” It was a relief
to know that someone had seen Benny Upsher lately. The letter was but
four days old, and he was then on his way to the front. Probably he was
not yet in the fighting he wanted, and one could, without remorse, call
up an unmutilated face and clear blue eyes.

Campton, re-reading the postscript, was struck by a small thing. George
had originally written: “I saw Benny Upsher yesterday,” and had then
altered the phrase to: “I saw a fellow who’d seen Benny Upsher.” There
was nothing out of the way in that: it simply showed that he had written
in haste and revised the sentence. But he added: “The young lunatic
looked very fit.” Well: that too was natural. It was “the fellow” who
reported Benny as looking fit; the phrase was rather elliptic, but
Campton could hardly have said why it gave him the impression that it
was George himself who had seen Upsher. The idea was manifestly absurd,
since there was the length of the front between George’s staff-town and
the fiery pit yawning for his cousin. Campton laid aside the letter with
the distinct wish that his son had not called Benny Upsher a young
lunatic.




                                  XIV


When Campton took his sketch of George to Leonce Black, the dealer who
specialized in “Camptons,” he was surprised at the magnitude of the sum
which the great picture-broker, lounging in a glossy War Office uniform
among his Gauguins and Vuillards, immediately offered.

Leonce Black noted his surprise and smiled. “You think there’s nothing
doing nowadays? Don’t you believe it, Mr. Campton. Now that the big men
have stopped painting, the collectors are all the keener to snap up
what’s left in their portfolios.” He placed the cheque in Campton’s
hand, and drew back to study the effect of the sketch, which he had
slipped into a frame against a velvet curtain. “Ah??” he said, as if he
were tasting an old wine.

As Campton turned to go the dealer’s enthusiasm bubbled over. “Haven’t
you got anything more? Remember me if you have.”

“I don’t sell my sketches,” said Campton. “This was exceptional?for a
charity....”

“I know, I know. Well, you’re likely to have a good many more calls of
the same sort before we get this war over,” the dealer remarked
philosophically. “Anyhow, remember I can place anything you’ll give me.
When people want a Campton it’s to me they come. I’ve got standing
orders from two clients ... both given before the war, and both good
to-day.”

Campton paused in the doorway, seized by his old fear of the painting’s
passing into Anderson Brant’s possession.

“Look here: where is this one going?”

The dealer cocked his handsome grey head and glanced archly through
plump eyelids. “Violation of professional secrecy? Well.... Well ...
under constraint I’ll confess it’s to a young lady: great admirer,
artist herself. Had her order by cable from New York a year ago. Been on
the lookout ever since.”

“Oh, all right,” Campton answered, repocketing the money.

He set out at once for “The Friends of French Art,” and Leonce Black,
bound for the Ministry of War, walked by his side, regaling him
alternately with the gossip of the Ministry and with racy anecdotes of
the dealers’ world. In M. Black’s opinion the war was an inexcusable
blunder, since Germany was getting to be the best market for the kind of
freak painters out of whom the dealers who “know how to make a man
‘foam’” can make a big turn over. “I don’t know what on earth will
become of all those poor devils now: Paris cared for them only because
she knew Germany would give any money for their things. Personally, as
you know, I’ve always preferred sounder goods: I’m a classic, my dear
Campton, and I can feel only classic art,” said the dealer, swelling out
his uniformed breast and stroking his Assyrian nose as though its
handsome curve followed the pure Delphic line. “But, as long as things
go on as they are at present in _my_ department of the administration,
the war’s not going to end in a hurry,” he continued. “And now we’re in
for it, we’ve got to see the thing through.”

Campton found Boylston, as usual, in his melancholy _cabinet
particulier_. He was listening to the tale of a young woman with
streaming eyes and an extravagant hat. She was so absorbed in her
trouble that she did not notice Campton’s entrance, and behind her back
the painter made a sign to say that she was not to be interrupted.

He was as much interested in the suppliant’s tale as in watching
Boylston’s way of listening. That modest and commonplace-looking young
man was beginning to excite a lively curiosity in Campton. It was not
only that he remembered George’s commendation, for he knew that the
generous enthusiasms of youth may be inspired by trifles imperceptible
to the older. It was Boylston himself who interested the painter. He
knew no more of the young man than the scant details Miss Anthony could
give. Boylston, it appeared, was the oldest hope of a well-to-do
Connecticut family. On his leaving college a place had been reserved for
him in the paternal business; but he had announced good-humouredly that
he did not mean to spend his life in an office, and one day, after a ten
minutes’ conversation with his father, as to which details were lacking,
he had packed a suitcase and sailed for France. There he had lived ever
since, in shabby rooms in the rue de Verneuil, on the scant allowance
remitted by an irate parent: apparently never running into debt, yet
always ready to help a friend.

All the American art-students in Paris knew Boylston; and though he was
still in the early thirties, they all looked up to him. For Boylston had
one quality which always impresses youth: Boylston knew everybody.
Whether you went with him to a smart restaurant in the rue Royale, or to
a wine-shop of the Left Bank, the _patron_ welcomed him with the same
cordiality, and sent the same emphatic instructions to the cook. The
first fresh peas and the tenderest spring chicken were always for this
quiet youth, who, when he was alone, dined cheerfully on veal and _vin
ordinaire_. If you wanted to know where to get the best Burgundy,
Boylston could tell you; he could also tell you where to buy an
engagement ring for your girl, a Ford runabout going at half-price, or
the _papier timbre_ on which to address a summons to a recalcitrant
laundress.

If you got into a row with your landlady you found that Boylston knew
her, and that at sight of him she melted and withdrew her claim; or,
failing this, he knew the solicitor in whose office her son was a clerk,
or had other means of reducing her to reason. Boylston also knew a man
who could make old clocks go, another who could clean flannels without
their shrinking, and a third who could get you old picture-frames for a
song; and, best of all, when any inexperienced American youth was caught
in the dark Parisian cobweb (and the people at home were on no account
to hear about it) Boylston was found to be the friend and familiar of
certain occult authorities who, with a smile and a word of warning,
could break the mesh and free the victim.

The mystery was, how and why all these people did what Boylston wanted;
but the reason began to dawn on Campton as he watched the young woman in
the foolish hat deliver herself of her grievance. Boylston was simply a
perfect listener?and most of his life was spent in listening. Everything
about him listened: his round forehead and peering screwed-up eyes, his
lips twitching responsively under the close-clipped moustache, and every
crease and dimple of his sagacious and humorous young countenance; even
the attitude of his short fat body, with elbows comfortably bedded in
heaped up papers, and fingers plunged into his crinkled hair. There was
never a hint of hurry or impatience about him: having once asserted his
right to do what he liked with his life, he was apparently content to
let all his friends prey on it. You never caught his eye on the clock,
or his lips shaping an answer before you had turned the last corner of
your story. Yet when the story was told, and he had surveyed it in all
its bearings, you could be sure he would do what he could for you, and
do it before the day was over.

“Very well, Mademoiselle,” he said, when the young woman had finished.
“I promise you I’ll see Mme. Beausite, and try to get her to recognize
your claim.”

“Mind you, I don’t ask charity?I won’t _take_ charity from your
committee!” the young lady hissed, gathering up a tawdry hand-bag.

“Oh, we’re not forcing it on any one,” smiled Boylston, opening the door
for her.

When he turned back to Campton his face was flushed and frowning. “Poor
thing! She’s a nuisance, but I’ll fight to the last ditch for her. The
chap she lives with was Beausite’s secretary and understudy, and
devilled for him before the war. The poor fellow has come back from the
front a complete wreck, and can’t even collect the salary Beausite owes
him for the last three months before the war. Beausite’s plea is that
he’s too poor, and that the war lets him out of paying. Of course he
counts on our doing it for him.”

“And you’re not going to?”

“Well,” said Boylston humorously, “I shouldn’t wonder if he beat us in
the long run. But I’ll have a try first; and anyhow the poor girl
needn’t know. She used to earn a little money doing fashion-articles,
but of course there’s no market for that now, and I don’t see how the
pair can live. They have a little boy, and there’s an infirm mother, and
they’re waiting to get married till the girl can find a job.”

“Good Lord!” Campton groaned, with a sudden vision of the countless
little trades and traffics arrested by the war, and all the industrious
thousands reduced to querulous pauperism or slow death.

“How _do_ they live?all these people?”

“They don’t?always. I could tell you??”

“Don’t, for God’s sake; I can’t stand it.” Campton drew out the cheque.
“Here: this is what I’ve got for the Davrils.”

“Good Lord!” said Boylston, staring with round eyes.

“It will pull them through, anyhow, won’t it?” Campton triumphed.

“Well??” said Boylston. “It will if you’ll endorse it,” he added,
smiling. Campton laughed and took up a pen.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A day or two later Campton, returning home one afternoon, overtook a
small black-veiled figure with a limp like his own. He guessed at once
that it was the lame Davril girl, come to thank him; and his dislike of
such ceremonies caused him to glance about for a way of escape. But as
he did so the girl turned with a smile that put him to shame. He
remembered Adele Anthony’s saying, one day when he had found her in her
refugee office patiently undergoing a like ordeal: “We’ve no right to
refuse the only coin they can repay us in.”

The Davril girl was a plain likeness of her brother, with the same
hungry flame in her eyes. She wore the nondescript black that Campton
had remarked at the funeral; and knowing the importance which the French
attach to every detail of conventional mourning, he wondered that mother
and daughter had not laid out part of his gift in crape. But doubtless
the equally strong instinct of thrift had caused Mme. Davril to put away
the whole sum.

Mlle. Davril greeted Campton pleasantly, and assured him that she had
not found the long way from Villejuif to Montmartre too difficult.

“I would have gone to you,” the painter protested; but she answered that
she wanted to see with her own eyes where her brother’s friend lived.

In the studio she looked about her with a quick searching glance, said
“Oh, a piano??” as if the fact were connected with the object of her
errand?and then, settling herself in an armchair, unclasped her shabby
hand-bag.

“Monsieur, there has been a misunderstanding; this money is not ours.”
She laid Campton’s cheque on the table.

A flush of annoyance rose to the painter’s face. What on earth had
Boylston let him in for? If the Davrils were as proud as all that it was
not worth while to have sold a sketch it had cost him such a pang to
part with. He felt the exasperation of the would be philanthropist when
he first discovers that nothing complicates life as much as doing good.

“But, Mademoiselle??”

“This money is not ours. If Rene had lived he would never have sold your
picture; and we would starve rather than betray his trust.”

When stout ladies in velvet declare that they would starve rather than
sacrifice this or that principle, the statement has only the cold beauty
of rhetoric; but on the drawn lips of a thinly-clad young woman
evidently acquainted with the process, it becomes a fiery reality.

“Starve?nonsense! My dear young lady, you betray him when you talk like
that,” said Campton, moved.

She shook her head. “It depends, Monsieur, which things matter most to
one. We shall never?my mother and I?do anything that Rene would not have
done. The picture was not ours: we brought it back to you??”

“But if the picture’s not yours it’s mine,” Campton interrupted; “and
I’d a right to sell it, and a right to do what I choose with the money.”

His visitor smiled. “That’s what we feel; it was what I was coming to.”
And clasping her threadbare glove-tips about the arms of the chair Mlle.
Davril set forth with extreme precision the object of her visit.

It was to propose that Campton should hand over the cheque to “The
Friends of French Art,” devoting one-third to the aid of the families of
combatant painters, the rest to young musicians and authors. “It doesn’t
seem right that only the painters’ families should benefit by what your
committee are doing. And Rene would have thought so too. He knew so many
young men of letters and journalists who, before the war, just managed
to keep their families alive; and in my profession I could tell you of
poor music-teachers and accompanists whose work stopped the day war
broke out, and who have been living ever since on the crusts their
luckier comrades could spare them. Rene would have let us accept from
you help that was shared with others: he would have been so glad, often,
of a few francs to relieve the misery we see about us. And this great
sum might be the beginning of a co-operative work for artists ruined by
the war.”

She went on to explain that in the families of almost all the young
artists at the front there was at least one member at home who practised
one of the arts, or who was capable of doing some kind of useful work.
The value of Campton’s gift, Mlle. Davril argued, would be tripled if it
were so employed as to give the artists and their families occupation:
producing at least the illusion that those who could were earning their
living, or helping their less fortunate comrades. “It’s not only a
question of saving their dignity: I don’t believe much in that. You have
dignity or you haven’t?and if you have, it doesn’t need any saving,”
this clear-toned young woman remarked. “The real question, for all of us
artists, is that of keeping our hands in, and our interest in our work
alive; sometimes, too, of giving a new talent its first chance. At any
rate, it would mean work and not stagnation; which is all that most
charity produces.”

She developed her plan: for the musicians, concerts in private houses
(hence her glance at the piano); for the painters, small exhibitions in
the rooms of the committee, where their pictures would be sold with the
deduction of a percentage, to be returned to the general fund; and for
the writers?well, their lot was perhaps the hardest to deal with; but an
employment agency might be opened, where those who chose could put their
names down and take such work as was offered. Above all, Mlle. Davril
again insisted, the fund created by Campton’s gift was to be spent only
in giving employment, not for mere relief.

Campton listened with growing attention. Nothing hitherto had been less
in the line of his interests than the large schemes of general
amelioration which were coming to be classed under the transatlantic
term of “Social Welfare.” If questioned on the subject a few months
earlier he would probably have concealed his fundamental indifference
under the profession of an extreme individualism, and the assertion of
every man’s right to suffer and starve in his own way. Even since Rene
Davril’s death had brought home to him the boundless havoc of the war,
he had felt no more than the impulse to ease his own pain by putting his
hand in his pocket when a particular case was too poignant to be
ignored.

Yet here were people who had already offered their dearest to France,
and were now pleading to be allowed to give all the rest; and who had
had the courage and wisdom to think out in advance the form in which
their gift would do most good. Campton had the awe of the unpractical
man for anyone who knows how to apply his ideas. He felt that there was
no use in disputing Mlle. Davril’s plan: he must either agree to it or
repocket his cheque.

“I’ll do as you want, of course; but I’m not much good about details.
Hadn’t you better consult some one else?” he suggested.

Oh, that was already done: she had outlined her project to Miss Anthony
and Mr. Boylston, who approved. All she wanted was Campton’s consent;
and this he gave the more cordially when he learned that, for the
present at least, nothing more was expected of him. First steps in
beneficence, he felt, were unspeakably terrifying; yet he was already
aware that, resist as he might, he would never be able to keep his
footing on the brink of that abyss.

Into it, as the days went by, his gaze was oftener and oftener plunged.
He had begun to feel that pity was his only remaining link with his
kind, the one barrier between himself and the dreadful solitude which
awaited him when he returned to his studio. What would there have been
to think of there, alone among his unfinished pictures and his broken
memories, if not the wants and woes of people more bereft than himself?
His own future was not a thing to dwell on. George was safe: but what
George and he were likely to make of each other after the ordeal was
over was a question he preferred to put aside. He was more and more
taking George and his safety for granted, as a solid standing-ground
from which to reach out a hand to the thousands struggling in the
depths. As long as the world’s fate was in the balance it was every
man’s duty to throw into that balance his last ounce of brain and
muscle. Campton wondered how he had ever thought that an accident of
birth, a remoteness merely geographical, could justify, or even make
possible, an attitude of moral aloofness. Harvey Mayhew’s reasons for
wishing to annihilate Germany began to seem less grotesque than his own
for standing aside.

In the heat of his conversion he no longer grudged the hours given to
Mr. Mayhew. He patiently led his truculent relative from one government
office to another, everywhere laying stress on Mr. Mayhew’s sympathy
with France and his desire to advocate her cause in the United States,
and trying to curtail his enumeration of his grievances by a glance at
the clock, and the reminder that they had another Minister to see. Mr.
Mayhew was not very manageable. His adventure had grown with repetition,
and he was increasingly disposed to feel that the retaliation he called
down on Germany could best be justified by telling every one what he had
suffered from her. Intensely aware of the value of time in Utica, he was
less sensible of it in Paris, and seemed to think that, since he had
left a flourishing business to preach the Holy War, other people ought
to leave their affairs to give him a hearing. But his zeal and
persistence were irresistible, and doors which Campton had seen barred
against the most reasonable appeals flew open at the sound of Mr.
Mayhew’s trumpet. His pink face and silvery hair gave him an apostolic
air, and circles to which America had hitherto been a mere speck in
space suddenly discovered that he represented that legendary character,
the Typical American.

The keen Boylston, prompt to note and utilize the fact, urged Campton to
interest Mr. Mayhew in “The Friends of French Art,” and with
considerable flourish the former Peace Delegate was produced at a
committee meeting and given his head. But his interest flagged when he
found that the “Friends” concerned themselves with Atrocities only in so
far as any act of war is one, and that their immediate task was the
humdrum one of feeding and clothing the families of the combatants and
sending “comforts” to the trenches. He served up, with a somewhat
dog-eared eloquence, the usual account of his own experiences, and
pressed a modest gift upon the treasurer; but when he departed, after
wringing everybody’s hands, and leaving the French members bedewed with
emotion, Campton had the conviction that their quiet weekly meetings
would not often be fluttered by his presence.

Campton was spending an increasing amount of time in the Palais Royal
restaurant, where he performed any drudgery for which no initiative was
required. Once or twice, when Miss Anthony was submerged by a fresh
influx of refugees, he lent her a hand too; and on most days he dropped
in late at her office, waited for her to sift and dismiss the last
applicants, and saw her home through the incessant rain. It interested
him to note that the altruism she had so long wasted on pampered friends
was developing into a wise and orderly beneficence. He had always
thought of her as an eternal schoolgirl; now she had grown into a woman.
Sometimes he fancied the change dated from the moment when their eyes
had met across the station, the day they had seen George off. He
wondered whether it might not be interesting to paint her new face, if
ever painting became again thinkable.

“Passion?I suppose the great thing is a capacity for passion,” he mused.

In himself he imagined the capacity to be quite dead. He loved his son:
yes?but he was beginning to see that he loved him for certain qualities
he had read into him, and that perhaps after all??. Well, perhaps after
all the sin for which he was now atoning in loneliness was that of
having been too exclusively an artist, of having cherished George too
egotistically and self-indulgently, too much as his own most beautiful
creation. If he had loved him more humanly, more tenderly and
recklessly, might he have not put into his son the tenderness and
recklessness which were beginning to seem to him the qualities most
supremely human?




                                   XV


A week or two later, coming home late from a long day’s work at the
office, Campton saw Mme. Lebel awaiting him.

He always stopped for a word now; fearing each time that there was bad
news of Jules Lebel, but not wishing to seem to avoid her.

To-day, however, Mme. Lebel, though mysterious, was not anxious.

“Monsieur will find the studio open. There’s a lady: she insisted on
going up.”

“A lady? Why did you let her in? What kind of a lady?”

“A lady?well, a lady with such magnificent furs that one couldn’t keep
her out in the cold,” Mme. Lebel answered with simplicity.

Campton went up apprehensively. The idea of unknown persons in
possession of his studio always made him nervous. Whoever they were,
whatever errands they came on, they always?especially women?disturbed
the tranquil course of things, faced him with unexpected problems,
unsettled him in one way or another. Bouncing in on people suddenly was
like dynamiting fish: it left him with his mind full of fragments of
dismembered thoughts.

As he entered he perceived from the temperate atmosphere that Mme. Lebel
had not only opened the studio but made up the fire. The lady’s furs
must indeed be magnificent.

She sat at the farther end of the room, in a high-backed chair near the
stove, and when she rose he recognized his former wife. The long sable
cloak, which had slipped back over the chair, justified Mme. Lebel’s
description, but the dress beneath it appeared to Campton simpler than
Mrs. Brant’s habitual raiment. The lamplight, striking up into her
powdered face, puffed out her under-lids and made harsh hollows in her
cheeks. She looked frightened, ill and yet determined.

“John??” she began, laying her hand on his sleeve.

It was the first time she had ever set foot in his shabby quarters, and
in his astonishment he could only stammer out: “Julia??”

But as he looked at her he saw that her face was wet with tears.
“Not?bad news?” he broke out.

She shook her head and, drawing a handkerchief from a
diamond-monogrammed bag, wiped away the tears and the powder. Then she
pressed the handkerchief to her lips, gazing at him with eyes as
helpless as a child’s.

“Sit down,” said Campton.

As they faced each other across the long table, with papers and
paint-rags and writing materials pushed aside to make room for the
threadbare napkin on which his plate and glass, and bottle of _vin
ordinaire_, were set out, he wondered if the scene woke in her any
memory of their first days of gaiety and poverty, or if she merely
pitied him for still living in such squalor. And suddenly it occurred to
him that when the war was over, and George came back, it would be
pleasant to hunt out a little apartment in an old house in the Faubourg
St. Germain, put some good furniture in it, and oppose the discreeter
charm of such an interior to the heavy splendours of the Avenue Marigny.
How could he expect to hold a luxury-loving youth if he had only this
dingy studio to receive him in?

Mrs. Brant began to speak.

“I came here to see you because I didn’t wish any one to know; not
Adele, nor even Anderson.” Leaning toward him she went on in short
breathless sentences: “I’ve just left Madge Talkett: you know her, I
think? She’s at Mme. de Dolmetsch’s hospital. Something dreadful has
happened ... too dreadful. It seems that Mme. de Dolmetsch was very much
in love with Ladislas Isador; a writer, wasn’t he? I don’t know his
books, but Madge tells me they’re wonderful ... and of course men like
that ought not to be sent to the front....”

“Men like what?”

“Geniuses,” said Mrs. Brant. “He was dreadfully delicate besides, and
was doing admirable work on some military commission in Paris; I believe
he knew any number of languages. And poor Mme. de Dolmetsch?you know
I’ve never approved of her; but things are so changed nowadays, and at
any rate she was madly attached to him, and had done everything to keep
him in Paris: medical certificates, people at Headquarters working for
her, and all the rest. But it seems there are no end of officers always
intriguing to get staff-jobs: strong able-bodied young men who ought to
be in the trenches, and are fit for nothing else, but who are jealous of
the others. And last week, in spite of all she could do, poor Isador was
ordered to the front.”

Campton made an impatient movement. It was even more distasteful to him
to be appealed to by Mrs. Brant in Isador’s name than by Mme. de
Dolmetsch in George’s. His gorge rose at the thought that people should
associate in their minds cases as different as those of his son and Mme.
de Dolmetsch’s lover.

“I’m sorry,” he said. “But if you’ve come to ask me to do something more
about George?take any new steps?it’s no use. I can’t do the sort of
thing to keep my son safe that Mme. de Dolmetsch would do for her
lover.”

Mrs. Brant stared. “Safe? He was killed the day after he got to the
front.”

“Good Lord?Isador?”

Ladislas Isador killed at the front! The words remained unmeaning; by no
effort could Campton relate them to the fat middle-aged philanderer with
his Jewish eyes, his Slav eloquence, his Levantine gift for getting on,
and for getting out from under. Campton tried to picture the clever
contriving devil drawn in his turn into that merciless red eddy, and
gulped down the Monster’s throat with the rest. What a mad world it was,
in which the same horrible and magnificent doom awaited the coward and
the hero!

“Poor Mme. de Dolmetsch!” he muttered, remembering with a sense of
remorse her desperate appeal and his curt rebuff. Once again the poor
creature’s love had enlightened her, and she had foreseen what no one
else in the world would have believed: that her lover was to die like a
hero.

“Isador was nearly forty, and had a weak heart; and she’d left nothing,
literally nothing, undone to save him.” Campton read in his wife’s eyes
what was coming. “It’s impossible _now_ that George should not be
taken,” Mrs. Brant went on.

The same thought had tightened Campton’s own heart-strings; but he had
hoped she would not say it.

“It may be George’s turn any day,” she insisted.

They sat and looked at each other without speaking; then she began again
imploringly: “I tell you there’s not a moment to be lost!”

Campton picked up a palette-knife and began absently to rub it with an
oily rag. Mrs. Brant’s anguished voice still sounded on. “Unless
something is done immediately.... It appears there’s a regular hunt for
_embusques_, as they’re called. As if it was everybody’s business to be
killed! How’s the staff-work to be carried on if they’re all taken? But
it’s certain that if we don’t act at once ... act energetically....”

He fixed his eyes on hers. “Why do you come to _me_?” he asked.

Her lids opened wide. “But he’s our child.”

“Your husband knows more people?he has ways, you’ve often told me??”

She reddened faintly and seemed about to speak; but the reply died on
her lips.

“Why did you say,” Campton pursued, “that you had come here because you
wanted to see me without Brant’s knowing it?”

She lowered her eyes and fixed them on the knife he was still
automatically rubbing.

“Because Anderson thinks.... Anderson won’t.... He says he’s done all he
can.”

“Ah??” cried Campton, drawing a deep breath. He threw back his
shoulders, as if to shake off a weight. “I?feel exactly as Brant does,”
he declared.

“You?you feel as he does? You, George’s father? But a father has never
done all he can for his son! There’s always something more that he can
do!”

The words, breaking from her in a cry, seemed suddenly to change her
from an ageing doll into a living and agonized woman. Campton had never
before felt as near to her, as moved to the depths by her. For the
length of a heart-beat he saw her again with a red-haired baby in her
arms, the light of morning on her face.

“My dear?I’m sorry.” He laid his hand on hers.

“Sorry?sorry? I don’t want you to be sorry. I want you to do something?I
want you to save him!”

He faced her with bent head, gazing absently at their interwoven
fingers: each hand had forgotten to release the other.

“I can’t do anything more,” he repeated.

She started up with a despairing exclamation. “What’s happened to you?
Who has influenced you? What has changed you?”

How could he answer her? He hardly knew himself: had hardly been
conscious of the change till she suddenly flung it in his face. If blind
animal passion be the profoundest as well as the fiercest form of
attachment, his love for his boy was at that moment as nothing to hers.
Yet his feeling for George, in spite of all the phrases he dressed it
in, had formerly in its essence been no other. That his boy should
survive?survive at any price?that had been all he cared for or sought to
achieve. It had been convenient to justify himself by arguing that
George was not bound to fight for France; but Campton now knew that he
would have made the same effort to protect his son if the country
engaged had been his own.

In the careless pre-war world, as George himself had once said, it had
seemed unbelievable that people should ever again go off and die in a
ditch to oblige anybody. Even now, the automatic obedience of the
millions of the untaught and the unthinking, though it had its deep
pathetic significance, did not move Campton like the clear-eyed
sacrifice of the few who knew why they were dying. Jean Fortin, Rene
Davril, and such lads as young Louis Dastrey, with his reasoned horror
of butchery and waste in general, and his instant grasp of the necessity
of this particular sacrifice: it was they who had first shed light on
the dark problem.

Campton had never before, at least consciously, thought of himself and
the few beings he cared for as part of a greater whole, component
elements of the immense amazing spectacle. But the last four months had
shown him man as a defenceless animal suddenly torn from his shell,
stripped of all the interwoven tendrils of association, habit,
background, daily ways and words, daily sights and sounds, and flung out
of the human habitable world into naked ether, where nothing breathes or
lives. That was what war did; that was why those who best understood it
in all its farthest-reaching abomination willingly gave their lives to
put an end to it.

He heard Mrs. Brant crying.

“Julia,” he said, “Julia, I wish you’d try to see....”

She dashed away her tears. “See what? All I see is _you_, sitting here
safe and saying you can do nothing to save him! But to have the right to
say that you ought to be in the trenches yourself! What do you suppose
those young men out there think of their fathers, safe at home, who are
too high-minded and conscientious to protect them?”

He looked at her compassionately. “Yes,” he said, “that’s the bitterest
part of it. But for that, there would hardly be anything in the worst
war for us old people to lie awake about.”

Mrs. Brant had stood up and was feverishly pulling on her gloves: he saw
that she no longer heard him. He helped her to draw her furs about her,
and stood waiting while she straightened her veil and tapped the waves
of hair into place, her eyes blindly seeking for a mirror. There was
nothing more that either could say.

He lifted the lamp, and went out of the door ahead of her.

“You needn’t come down,” she said in a sob; but leaning over the rail
into the darkness he answered: “I’ll give you a light: the concierge has
forgotten the lamp on the stairs.”

He went ahead of her down the long greasy flights, and as they reached
the ground floor he heard a noise of feet coming and going, and
frightened voices exclaiming. In the doorway of the porter’s lodge Mrs.
Brant’s splendid chauffeur stood looking on compassionately at a group
of women gathered about Mme. Lebel.

The old woman sat in her den, her arms stretched across the table, her
sewing fallen at her feet. On the table lay an open letter. The grocer’s
wife from the corner stood by, sobbing.

Mrs. Brant stopped, and Campton, sure now of what was coming, pushed his
way through the neighbours about the door. Mme. Lebel’s eyes met his
with the mute reproach of a tortured animal. “Jules,” she said, “last
Wednesday ... through the heart.”

Campton took her old withered hand. The women ceased sobbing and a hush
fell upon the stifling little room. When Campton looked up again he saw
Julia Brant, pale and bewildered, hurrying toward her motor, and the
vault of the porte-cochere sent back the chauffeur’s answer to her
startled question: “Poor old lady?yes, her only son’s been killed at the
front.”




                                  XVI


Campton sat with his friend Dastrey in the latter’s pleasant little
_entresol_ full of Chinese lacquer and Venetian furniture.

Dastrey, in the last days of January, had been sent home from his
ambulance with an attack of rheumatism; and when it became clear that he
could no longer be of use in the mud and cold of the army zone he had
reluctantly taken his place behind a desk at the Ministry of War. The
friends had dined early, so that he might get back to his night shift;
and they sat over coffee and liqueurs, the mist of their cigars floating
across lustrous cabinet-fronts and the worn gilding of slender consoles.

On the other side of the hearth young Boylston, sunk in an armchair,
smoked and listened.

“It always comes back to the same thing,” Campton was saying nervously.
“What right have useless old men like me, sitting here with my cigar by
this good fire, to preach blood and butchery to boys like George and
your nephew?”

Again and again, during the days since Mrs. Brant’s visit, he had turned
over in his mind the same torturing question. How was he to answer that
last taunt of hers?

Not long ago, Paul Dastrey would have seemed the last person to whom he
could have submitted such a problem. Dastrey, in the black August days,
starting for the front in such a frenzy of baffled blood-lust, had
remained for Campton the type of man with whom it was impossible to
discuss the war. But three months of hard service in _Postes de Secours_
and along the awful battle-edge had sent him home with a mind no longer
befogged by personal problems. He had done his utmost, and knew it; and
the fact gave him the professional calm which keeps surgeons and nurses
steady through all the horrors they are compelled to live among. Those
few months had matured and mellowed him more than a lifetime of Paris.

He leaned back with half-closed lids, quietly considering his friend’s
difficulty.

“I see. Your idea is that, being unable to do even the humble kind of
job that I’ve been assigned to, you’ve no right _not_ to try to keep
your boy out of it if you can?”

“Well?by any honourable means.”

Dastrey laughed faintly, and Campton reddened. “The word’s not happy, I
admit.”

“I wasn’t thinking of that: I was considering how the meaning had
evaporated out of lots of our old words, as if the general smash-up had
broken their stoppers. So many of them, you see,” said Dastrey smiling,
“we’d taken good care not to uncork for centuries. Since I’ve been on
the edge of what’s going on fifty miles from here a good many of my own
words have lost their meaning, and I’m not prepared to say where honour
lies in a case like yours.” He mused a moment, and then went on: “What
would George’s view be?”

Campton did not immediately reply. Not so many weeks ago he would have
welcomed the chance of explaining that George’s view, thank God, had
remained perfectly detached and objective, and that the cheerful
acceptance of duties forcibly imposed on him had not in the least
obscured his sense of the fundamental injustice of his being mixed up in
the thing at all.

But how could he say this now? If George’s view were still what his
father had been in the habit of saying it was, then he held that view
alone: Campton himself no longer thought that any civilized man could
afford to stand aside from such a conflict.

“As far as I know,” he said, “George hasn’t changed his mind.”

Boylston stirred in his armchair, knocked the ash from his cigar, and
looked up at the ceiling.

“Whereas _you_??” Dastrey suggested.

“Yes,” said Campton. “I feel differently. You speak of the difference of
having been in contact with what’s going on out there. But how can
anybody _not_ be in contact, who has any imagination, any sense of right
and wrong? Do these pictures and hangings ever shut it out from you?or
those books over there, when you turn to them after your day’s work?
Perhaps they do, because you’ve got a real job, a job you’ve been
ordered to do, and can’t not do. But for a useless drifting devil like
me?my God, the sights and the sounds of it are always with me!”

“There are a good many people who wouldn’t call you useless, Mr.
Campton,” said Boylston.

Campton shook his head. “I wish there were any healing in the kind of
thing I’m doing; perhaps there is to you, to whom it appears to come
naturally to love your kind.” (Boylston laughed.) “Service is of no use
without conviction: that’s one of the uncomfortable truths this stir-up
has brought to the surface. I was meant to paint pictures in a world at
peace, and I should have more respect for myself if I could go on
unconcernedly doing it, instead of pining to be in all the places where
I’m not wanted, and should be of no earthly use. That’s why??” he
paused, looked about him, and sought understanding in Dastrey’s friendly
gaze: “That’s why I respect George’s opinion, which really consists in
not having any, and simply doing without comment the work assigned to
him. The whole thing is so far beyond human measure that one’s
individual rage and revolt seem of no more use than a woman’s scream at
an accident she isn’t in.”

Even while he spoke, Campton knew he was arguing only against himself.
He did not in the least believe that any individual sentiment counted
for nothing at such a time, and Dastrey really spoke for him in
rejoining: “Every one can at least contribute an attitude: as you have,
my dear fellow. Boylston’s here to confirm it.”

Boylston grunted his assent.

“An attitude?an attitude?” Campton retorted. “The word is revolting to
me! Anything a man like me can do is too easy to be worth doing. And as
for anything one can _say_: how dare one say anything, in the face of
what is being done out there to keep this room and this fire, and this
ragged end of life, safe for such survivals as you and me?” He crossed
to the table to take another cigar. As he did so he laid an apologetic
pressure on his host’s shoulder. “Men of our age are the chorus of the
tragedy, Dastrey; we can’t help ourselves. As soon as I open my lips to
blame or praise I see myself in white petticoats, with a long beard held
on by an elastic, goading on the combatants in a cracked voice from a
safe corner of the ramparts. On the whole I’d sooner be spinning among
the women.”

“Well,” said Dastrey, getting up, “I’ve got to get back to my spinning
at the Ministry; where, by the way, there are some very pretty young
women at the distaff. It’s extraordinary how much better pretty girls
type than plain ones; I see now why they get all the jobs.”

The three went out into the winter blackness. They were used by this
time to the new Paris: to extinguished lamps, shuttered windows,
deserted streets, the almost total cessation of wheeled traffic. All
through the winter, life had seemed in suspense everywhere, as much on
the battle-front as in the rear. Day after day, week after week, of rain
and sleet and mud; day after day, week after week, of vague
non-committal news from west and east; everywhere the enemy baffled but
still menacing, everywhere death, suffering, destruction, without any
perceptible oscillation of the scales, any compensating hope of good to
come out of the long slow endless waste. The benumbed and darkened Paris
of those February days seemed the visible image of a benumbed and
darkened world.

Down the empty asphalt sheeted with rain the rare street lights
stretched interminable reflections. The three men crossed the bridge and
stood watching the rush of the Seine. Below them gloomed the vague bulk
of deserted bath-houses, unlit barges, river-steamers out of commission.
The Seine too had ceased to live: only a single orange gleam, low on the
water’s edge, undulated on the jetty waves like a streamer of seaweed.

The two Americans left Dastrey at his Ministry, and the painter strolled
on to Boylston’s lodging before descending to the underground railway.
He, whom his lameness had made so heavy and indolent, now limped about
for hours at a time over wet pavements and under streaming skies: these
midnight tramps had become a sort of expiatory need to him. “Out
there?out there, if they had these wet stones under them they’d think it
was the floor of heaven,” he used to muse, driving on obstinately
through rain and darkness.

The thought of “Out there” besieged him day and night, the phrase was
always in his ears. Wherever he went he was pursued by visions of that
land of doom: visions of fathomless mud, rat-haunted trenches, freezing
nights under the sleety sky, men dying in the barbed wire between the
lines or crawling out to save a comrade and being shattered to death on
the return. His collaboration with Boylston had brought Campton into
close contact with these things. He knew by heart the history of scores
and scores of young men of George’s age who were doggedly suffering and
dying a few hours away from the Palais Royal office where their records
were kept. Some of these histories were so heroically simple that the
sense of pain was lost in beauty, as though one were looking at
suffering transmuted into poetry. But others were abominable,
unendurable, in their long-drawn useless horror: stories of cold and
filth and hunger, of ineffectual effort, of hideous mutilation, of men
perishing of thirst in a shell-hole, and half-dismembered bodies
dragging themselves back to shelter only to die as they reached it.
Worst of all were the perpetually recurring reports of military
blunders, medical neglect, carelessness in high places: the torturing
knowledge of the lives that might have been saved if this or that
officer’s brain, this or that surgeon’s hand, had acted more promptly.
An impression of waste, confusion, ignorance, obstinacy, prejudice, and
the indifference of selfishness or of mortal fatigue, emanated from
these narratives written home from the front, or faltered out by white
lips on hospital pillows.

“The Friends of French Art,” especially since they had enlarged their
range, had to do with young men accustomed to the freest exercise of
thought and criticism. A nation in arms does not judge a war as simply
as an army of professional soldiers. All these young intelligences were
so many subtly-adjusted instruments for the testing of the machinery of
which they formed a part; and not one accepted the results passively.
Yet in one respect all were agreed: the “had to be” of the first day was
still on every lip. The German menace must be met: chance willed that
theirs should be the generation to meet it; on that point speculation
was vain and discussion useless. The question that stirred them all was
how the country they were defending was helping them to carry on the
struggle. There the evidence was cruelly clear, the comment often
scathingly explicit; and Campton, bending still lower over the abyss,
caught a shuddering glimpse of what might be?must be?if political
blunders, inertia, tolerance, perhaps even evil ambitions and
connivances, should at last outweigh the effort of the front. There was
no logical argument against such a possibility. All civilizations had
their orbit; all societies rose and fell. Some day, no doubt, by the
action of that law, everything that made the world livable to Campton
and his kind would crumble in new ruins above the old. Yes?but woe to
them by whom such things came; woe to the generation that bowed to such
a law! The Powers of Darkness were always watching and seeking their
hour; but the past was a record of their failures as well as of their
triumphs. Campton, brushing up his history, remembered the great
turning-points of progress, saw how the liberties of England had been
born of the ruthless discipline of the Norman conquest, and how even out
of the hideous welter of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic wars
had come more freedom and a wiser order. The point was to remember that
the efficacy of the sacrifice was always in proportion to the worth of
the victims; and there at least his faith was sure.

He could not, he felt, leave his former wife’s appeal unnoticed; after a
day or two he wrote to George, telling him of Mrs. Brant’s anxiety, and
asking in vague terms if George himself thought any change in his
situation probable. His letter ended abruptly: “I suppose it’s hardly
time yet to ask for leave??”




                                  XVII


Not long after his midnight tramp with Boylston and Dastrey the post
brought Campton two letters. One was postmarked Paris, the other bore
the military frank and was addressed in his son’s hand: he laid it aside
while he glanced at the first. It contained an engraved card:

         +---------------------------------------------------+
         |                                                   |
         |              _Mrs. Anderson Brant_                |
         |                                                   |
         |      _At Home on February 20th at 4 o’clock_      |
         |                                                   |
         |  _Mr. Harvey Mayhew will give an account of his   |
         |                captivity in Germany               |
         |            Mme. de Dolmetsch will sing_           |
         |                                                   |
         |  _For the benefit of the “Friends of French Art   |
         |                    Committee”_                    |
         |                                                   |
         |                _Tickets 100 francs_               |
         |                                                   |
         +---------------------------------------------------+

Enclosed was the circular of the sub-committee in aid of Musicians at
the Front, with which Campton was not directly associated. It bore the
names of Mrs. Talkett, Mme. Beausite and a number of other French and
American ladies.

Campton tossed the card away. He was not annoyed by the invitation: he
knew that Miss Anthony and Mlle. Davril were getting up a series of
drawing-room entertainments for that branch of the charity, and that the
card had been sent to him as a member of the Honorary Committee. But any
reminder of the sort always gave a sharp twitch to the Brant nerve in
him. He turned to George’s letter.

It was no longer than usual; but in other respects it was unlike his
son’s previous communications. Campton read it over two or three times.


“Dear Dad, thanks for yours of the tenth, which must have come to me on
skis, the snow here is so deep.” (There had, in fact, been a heavy
snow-fall in the Argonne). “Sorry mother is bothering about things
again; as you’ve often reminded me, they always have a way of ‘being as
they will be,’ and even war doesn’t seem to change it. Nothing to worry
her in my case?but you can’t expect her to believe that, can you?
Neither you nor I can help it, I suppose.

“There’s one thing that might help, though; and that is, your letting
her feel that you’re a little nearer to her. War makes a lot of things
look differently, especially this sedentary kind of war: it’s rather
like going over all the old odds-and-ends in one’s cupboards. And some
of them do look so foolish.

“I wish you’d see her now and then?just naturally, as if it had
happened. You know you’ve got one Inexhaustible Topic between you. The
said I. T. is doing well, and has nothing new to communicate up to now
except a change of address. Hereafter please write to my Base instead of
directing here, as there’s some chance of a shift of H.Q. The precaution
is probably just a new twist of the old red tape, signifying nothing;
but Base will always reach me if we _are_ shifted. Let mother know, and
explain, please; otherwise she’ll think the unthinkable.

“Interrupted by big drive?quill-drive, of course!

                                “As ever
                         “GEORGIUS SCRIBLERIUS.

“P.S. Don’t be too savage to Uncle Andy either.

“No. 2.?I _had_ thought of leave; but perhaps you’re right about that.”


It was the first time George had written in that way of his mother. His
smiling policy had always been to let things alone, and go on
impartially dividing his devotion between his parents, since they
refused to share even that common blessing. But war gave everything a
new look; and he had evidently, as he put it, been turning over the old
things in his cupboards. How was it possible, Campton wondered, that
after such a turning over he was still content to write “Nothing new to
communicate,” and to make jokes about another big quill-drive? Glancing
at the date of the letter, Campton saw that it had been written on the
day after the first ineffectual infantry assault on Vauquois. And George
was sitting a few miles off, safe in headquarters at Sainte Menehould,
with a stout roof over his head and a beautiful brown gloss on his
boots, scribbling punning letters while his comrades fell back from that
bloody summit....

Suddenly Campton’s eyes filled. No; George had not written that letter
for the sake of the joke: the joke was meant to cover what went before
it. Ah, how young the boy was to imagine that his father would not see!
Yes, as he said, war made so many of the old things look foolish....

Campton set out for the Palais Royal. He felt happier than for a long
time past: the tone of his boy’s letter seemed to correspond with his
own secret change of spirit. He knew the futility of attempting to bring
the Brants and himself together, but was glad that George had made the
suggestion. He resolved to see Julia that afternoon.

At the Palais Royal he found the indefatigable Boylston busy with an
exhibition of paintings sent home from the front, and Mlle. Davril
helping to catalogue them. Lamentable pensioners came and went, bringing
fresh tales of death, fresh details of savagery; the air was dark with
poverty and sorrow. In the background Mme. Beausite flitted about,
tragic and ineffectual. Boylston had not been able to extract a penny
from Beausite for his secretary and the latter’s left-handed family; but
Mme. Beausite had discovered a newly-organized charity which lent money
to “temporarily embarrassed” war-victims; and with an artless
self-satisfaction she had contrived to obtain a small loan for the
victim of her own thrift. “For what other purpose are such charities
founded?” she said, gently disclaiming in advance the praise which Miss
Anthony and Boylston had no thought of offering her. Whenever Campton
came in she effaced herself behind a desk, where she bent her beautiful
white head over a card-catalogue without any perceptible results.

The telephone rang. Boylston, after a moment, looked up from the
receiver.

“Mr. Campton!”

The painter glanced apprehensively at the instrument, which still seemed
to him charged with explosives.

“Take the message, do. The thing always snaps at me.”

There was a listening pause: then Boylston said: “It’s about Upsher??”

Campton started up. “Killed???”

“Not sure. It’s Mr. Brant. The news was wired to the bank; they want you
to break it to Mr. Mayhew.”

“Oh, Lord,” the painter groaned, the boy’s face suddenly rising before
his blurred eyes. Miss Anthony was not at the office that morning, or he
would have turned to her; at least she might have gone with him on his
quest. He could not ask Boylston to leave the office, and he felt that
curious incapacity to deal with the raw fact of sorrow which had often
given an elfin unreality to the most poignant moments of his life. It
was as though experience had to enter into the very substance of his
soul before he could even feel it.

“Other people,” he thought, “would know what to say, and I shan’t....”

Some one, meanwhile, had fetched a cab, and he drove to the Nouveau
Luxe, though with little hope of finding Mr. Mayhew. But Mr. Mayhew had
grown two secretaries, and turned the shrimp-pink drawing-room into an
office. One of the secretaries was there, hammering at a typewriter. She
was a competent young woman, who instantly extracted from her
pocket-diary the fact that her chief was at Mrs. Anderson Brant’s,
rehearsing.

“Rehearsing???”

“Why, yes; he’s to speak at Mrs. Brant’s next week on Atrocities,” she
said, surprised at Campton’s ignorance.

She suggested telephoning; but in the shrunken households of the rich,
where but one or two servants remained, telephoning had become as
difficult as in the understaffed hotels; and after one or two vain
attempts Campton decided to go to the Avenue Marigny. He felt that to
get hold of Mayhew as soon as possible might still in some vague way
help poor Benny?since it was not yet sure that he was dead. “Or else
it’s just the need to rush about,” he thought, conscious that the only
way he had yet found of dealing with calamity was a kind of ant-like
agitation.

On the way the round pink face of Benny Upsher continued to float before
him in its very substance, with the tangibility that only a painter’s
visions wear. “I want to be _in_ this thing,” he heard the boy
repeating, as if impelled by some blind instinct flowing down through
centuries and centuries of persistent childish minds.

“If he or his forebears had ever thought things out he probably would
have been alive and safe to-day,” Campton mused, “like George.... The
average person is always just obeying impulses stored up thousands of
years ago, and never re-examined since.” But this consideration, though
drawn from George’s own philosophy, did not greatly comfort his father.

At the Brants’ a bewildered concierge admitted him and rang a bell which
no one answered. The vestibule and the stairs were piled with bales of
sheeting, bulging jute-bags, stacked-up hospital supplies. A boy in
scout’s uniform swung inadequate legs from the lofty porter’s armchair
beside the table with its monumental bronze inkstand. Finally, from
above, a maid called to Campton to ascend.

In the drawing-room pictures and tapestries, bronzes and _pates
tendres_, had vanished, and a plain moquette replaced the priceless
Savonnerie across whose pompous garlands Campton had walked on the day
of his last visit.

The maid led him to the ball-room. Through double doors of glass Mr.
Mayhew’s oratorical accents, accompanied by faint chords on the piano,
reached Campton’s ears: he paused and looked. At the far end of the
great gilded room, on a platform backed by velvet draperies, stood Mr.
Mayhew, a perfect pearl in his tie and a perfect crease in his trousers.
Beside him was a stage-property tripod surmounted by a classical
perfume-burner; and on it Mme. de Dolmetsch, swathed in black, leaned in
an attitude of affliction.

Beneath the platform a bushy-headed pianist struck an occasional chord
from Chopin’s Dead March; and near the door three or four Red Cross
nurses perched on bales of blankets and listened. Under one of their
coifs Campton recognized Mrs. Talkett. She saw him and made a sign to
the lady nearest her; and the latter, turning, revealed the astonished
eyes of Julia Brant.

Campton’s first impression, while they shook hands under cover of Mr.
Mayhew’s rolling periods, was of his former wife’s gift of adaptation.
She had made herself a nurse’s face; not a theatrical imitation of it
like Mme. de Dolmetsch’s, nor yet the face of a nurse on a war-poster,
like Mrs. Talkett’s. Her lovely hair smoothed away under her strict
coif, her chin devoutly framed in linen, Mrs. Brant looked serious,
tender and efficient. Was it possible that she had found her vocation?

She gave him a glance of alarm, but his eyes must have told her that he
had not come about George, for with a reassured smile she laid a finger
on her lip and pointed to the platform; Campton noticed that her nails
were as beautifully polished as ever.

Mr. Mayhew was saying: “All that I have to give, yes, all that is most
precious to me, I am ready to surrender, to offer up, to lay down in the
Great Struggle which is to save the world from barbarism. I, who was one
of the first Victims of that barbarism....”

He paused and looked impressively at the bales of blankets. The piano
filled in the pause, and Mme. de Dolmetsch, without changing her
attitude, almost without moving her lips, sang a few notes of
lamentation.

“Of that hideous barbarism??” Mr. Mayhew began again. “I repeat that I
stand here ready to give up everything I hold most dear??”

“Do stop him,” Campton whispered to Mrs. Brant.

Little Mrs. Talkett, with the quick intuition he had noted in her,
sprang up and threaded her way to the stage. Mme. de Dolmetsch flowed
from one widowed pose into another, and Mr. Mayhew, majestically
descending, approached Mrs. Brant.

“You agree with me, I hope? You feel that anything more than Mme. de
Dolmetsch’s beautiful voice?anything in the way of a choral
accompaniment?would only weaken my effect? Where the facts are so
overwhelming it is enough to state them; that is,” Mr. Mayhew added
modestly, “if they are stated vigorously and tersely?as I hope they
are.”

Mme. de Dolmetsch, with the gesture of a marble mourner torn from her
cenotaph, glided up behind him and laid her hand in Campton’s.

“Dear friend, you’ve heard?... You remember our talk? I am Cassandra,
cursed with the hideous gift of divination.” Tears rained down her
cheeks, washing off the paint like mud swept by a shower. “My only
comfort,” she added, fixing her perfect eyes on Mr. Mayhew, “is to help
our great good friend in this crusade against the assassins of my
Ladislas.”

Mrs. Talkett had said a word to Mr. Mayhew. Campton saw his complacent
face go to pieces as if it had been vitrioled.

“Benny?Benny??” he screamed, “Benny hurt? My Benny? It’s some mistake!
What makes you think???” His eyes met Campton’s. “Oh, my God! Why, he’s
my sister’s child!” he cried, plunging his face into his soft manicured
hands.

In the cab to which Campton led him, he continued to sob with the
full-throated sobs of a large invertebrate distress, beating his breast
for an unfindable handkerchief, and, when he found it, immediately
weeping it into pulp.

Campton had meant to leave him at the bank; but when the taxi stopped
Mr. Mayhew was in too pitiful a plight for the painter to resist his
entreaty.

“It was you who saw Benny last?you can’t leave me!” the poor man
implored; and Campton followed him up the majestic stairway.

Their names were taken in to Mr. Brant, and with a motion of wonder at
the unaccountable humours of fate, Campton found himself for the first
time entering the banker’s private office.

Mr. Brant was elsewhere in the great glazed labyrinth, and while the
visitors waited, the painter’s registering eye took in the details of
the room, from the Barye _cire-perdue_ on a peach-coloured marble mantel
to the blue morocco armchairs about a giant writing-table. On the table
was an electric lamp in a celadon vase, and just the right number of
neatly folded papers lay under a paper-weight of Chinese crystal. The
room was as tidy as an expensive stage-setting or the cage of a
well-kept canary: the only object marring its order was a telegram lying
open on the desk.

Mr. Brant, grey and glossy, slipped in on noiseless patent leather. He
shook hands with Mr. Mayhew, bowed stiffly but deprecatingly to Campton,
gave his usual cough, and said: “This is terrible.”

And suddenly, as the three men sat there, so impressive and important
and powerless, with that fatal telegram marring the tidiness of the
desk, Campton murmured to himself: “If this thing were to happen to me I
couldn’t bear it.... I simply couldn’t bear it....”

Benny Upsher was not dead?at least his death was not certain. He had
been seen to fall in a surprise attack near Neuve Chapelle; the
telegram, from his commanding officer, reported him as “wounded and
missing.”

The words had taken on a hideous significance in the last months.
Freezing to death between the lines, mutilation and torture, or weeks of
slow agony in German hospitals: these were the alternative visions
associated with the now familiar formula. Mr. Mayhew had spent a part of
his time collecting details about the treatment of those who had fallen,
alive but wounded, into German hands; and Campton guessed that as he sat
there every one of these details, cruel, sanguinary, remorseless, had
started to life, and that all their victims wore the face of Benny.

The wretched man sat speechless, so unhinged and swinging loose in his
grief that Mr. Brant and Campton could only look on, following the
thoughts he was thinking, seeing the sights he was seeing, and each
avoiding the other’s eye lest they should betray to one another the
secret of their shared exultation at George’s safety.

Finally Mr. Mayhew was put in charge of a confidential clerk, who was to
go with him to the English Military Mission in the hope of getting
farther information. He went away, small and shrunken, with the
deprecating smile of a man who seeks to ward off a blow; as he left the
room Campton heard him say timidly to the clerk: “No doubt you speak
French, sir? The words I want don’t seem to come to me.”

Campton had meant to leave at the same time; but some vague impulse held
him back. He remembered George’s postscript: “Don’t be too savage to
Uncle Andy,” and wished he could think of some friendly phrase to ease
off his leave-taking. Mr. Brant seemed to have the same wish. He stood,
erect and tightly buttoned, one small hand resting on the arm of his
desk-chair, as though he were posing for a cabinet size, with the
photographer telling him to look natural. His lids twitched behind his
protective glasses, and his upper lip, which was as straight as a ruler,
detached itself by a hair’s breadth from the lower; but no word came.

Campton glanced up and down the white-panelled walls, and spoke
abruptly.

“There was no reason on earth,” he said, “why poor young Upsher should
ever have been in this thing.”

Mr. Brant bowed.

“This sort of crazy impulse to rush into other people’s rows,” Campton
continued with rising vehemence, “is of no more use to a civilized state
than any other unreasoned instinct. At bottom it’s nothing but what
George calls the baseball spirit: just an ignorant passion for
fisticuffs.”

Mr. Brant looked at him intently. “When did?George say that?” he asked,
with his usual cough before the name.

Campton coloured. “Oh?er?some time ago: in the very beginning, I think.
It was the view of most thoughtful young fellows at that time.”

“Quite so,” said Mr. Brant, cautiously stroking his moustache.

Campton’s eyes again wandered about the room.

“_Now_, of course??”

“Ah?_now_....”

The two men looked at each other, and Campton held out his hand. Mr.
Brant, growing pink about the forehead, extended his dry fingers, and
they shook hands in silence.




                                 XVIII


In the street Campton looked about him with the same confused sense as
when he had watched Fortin-Lescluze driving away to Chalons, his dead
son’s image in his eyes.

Each time that Campton came in contact with people on whom this calamity
had fallen he grew more acutely aware of his own inadequacy. If he had
been Fortin-Lescluze it would have been impossible for him to go back to
Chalons and resume his task. If he had been Harvey Mayhew, still less
could he have accommodated himself to the intolerable, the really
inconceivable, thought that Benny Upsher had vanished into that fiery
furnace like a crumpled letter tossed into a grate. Young Fortin was
defending his country?but Upsher, in God’s name what was Benny Upsher of
Connecticut doing in a war between the continental powers?

Suddenly Campton remembered that he had George’s letter in his pocket,
and that he had meant to go back with it to Mrs. Brant’s. He had started
out that morning full of the good intentions the letter had inspired;
but now he had no heart to carry them out. Yet George had said: “Let
mother know, and explain, please;” and such an injunction could not be
disregarded.

He was still hesitating on a street corner when he remembered that Miss
Anthony was probably on her way home for luncheon, and that if he made
haste he might find her despatching her hurried meal. It was instinctive
with him, in difficult hours, to turn to her, less for counsel than for
shelter; her simple unperplexed view of things was as comforting as his
mother’s solution of the dark riddles he used to propound in the
nursery.

He found her in her little dining-room, with Delft plates askew on
imitation Cordova leather, and a Death’s Head Pennon and a Prussian
helmet surmounting the nymph in cast bronze on the mantelpiece. In
entering he faced the relentless light of a ground-glass window opening
on an air-shaft; and Miss Anthony, flinging him a look, dropped her fork
and sprang up crying: “George??”

“George?why George?” Campton recovered his presence of mind under the
shock of her agitation. “What made you think of George?”

“Your?your face,” she stammered, sitting down again. “So absurd of
me.... But you looked.... A seat for monsieur, Jeanne,” she cried over
her shoulder to the pantry.

“Ah?my face? Yes, I suppose so. Benny Upsher has disappeared?I’ve just
had to break it to Mayhew.”

“Oh, that poor young Upsher? How dreadful!” Her own face grew instantly
serene. “I’m so sorry?so very sorry.... Yes, yes, you _shall_ lunch with
me?I know there’s another cutlet,” she insisted.

He shook his head. “I couldn’t.”

“Well, then, I’ve finished.” She led the way into the drawing-room.
There it was her turn to face the light, and he saw that her own
features were as perturbed as she had apparently discovered his to be.

“Poor Benny, poor boy!” she repeated, in the happy voice she might have
had if she had been congratulating Campton on the lad’s escape. He saw
that she was still thinking not of Upsher but of George, and her
inability to fit her intonation to her words betrayed the violence of
her relief. But why had she imagined George to be in danger?

Campton recounted the scene at which he had just assisted, and while she
continued to murmur her sympathy he asked abruptly: “Why on earth should
you have been afraid for George?”

Miss Anthony had taken her usual armchair. It was placed, as the
armchairs of elderly ladies usually are, with its high back to the
light, and Campton could no longer observe the discrepancy between her
words and her looks. This probably gave her laugh its note of
confidence. “My dear, if you were to cut me open George’s name would run
out of every vein,” she said.

“But in that tone?it was your tone. You thought he’d been?that something
had happened,” Campton insisted. “How could it, where he is?”

She shrugged her shoulders in the “foreign” way she had picked up in her
youth. The gesture was as incongruous as her slang, but it had become
part of her physical self, which lay in a loose mosaic of incongruities
over the solid crystal block of her character.

“Why, indeed? I suppose there are risks everywhere, aren’t there?”

“I don’t know.” He pulled out the letter he had received that morning. A
sudden light had illuminated it, and his hand shook. “I don’t even know
where George is any longer.”

She seemed to hesitate for a moment, and then asked calmly: “What do you
mean?”

“Here?look at this. We’re to write to his base. I’m to tell his mother
of the change.” He waited, cursing the faint winter light, and the
protecting back of her chair. “What can it mean,” he broke out, “except
that he’s left Sainte Menehould, that he’s been sent elsewhere, and that
he doesn’t want us to find out where?”

Miss Anthony bent her long nose over the page. Her hand held the letter
steadily, and he guessed, as she perused it, that she had had one of the
same kind, and had already drawn her own conclusions. What they were,
that first startled “George!” seemed to say. But would she ever let
Campton see as far into her thoughts again? He continued to watch her
hands patiently, since nothing was to be discovered of her face. The
hands folded the letter with precision, and handed it back to him.

“Yes: I see why you thought that?one might have,” she surprised him by
conceding. Then, darting at his unprotected face a gaze he seemed to
feel though he could not see it: “If it had meant that George had been
ordered to the front, how would you have felt?” she demanded.

He had not expected the question, and though in the last weeks he had so
often propounded it to himself, it caught him in the chest like a blow.
A sense of humiliation, a longing to lay his weakness bare, suddenly
rose in him, and he bowed his head. “I couldn’t ... I couldn’t bear it,”
he stammered.

She was silent for an interval; then she stood up, and laying her hand
on his shaking shoulder crossed the room to a desk in which he knew she
kept her private papers. Her keys clinked, and a moment later she handed
him a letter. It was in George’s writing, and dated on the same day as
his own.

“Dearest old girl, nothing new but my address. Hereafter please write to
our Base. This order has just been lowered from the empyrean at the end
of an endless reel of red tape. What it means nobody knows. It does not
appear to imply an immediate change of Headquarters; but even if such a
change comes, my job is likely to remain the same. I’m getting used to
it, and no wonder, for one day differeth not from another, and I’ve had
many of them now. Take care of Dad and mother, and of your matchless
self. I’m writing to father to-day. Your George the First?and Last (or
I’ll know why).”

The two letters bore one another out in a way which carried conviction.
Campton saw that his sudden doubts must have been produced (since he had
not felt them that morning) by the agonizing experience he had
undergone: the vision of Benny Upsher had unmanned him. George was safe,
and asked only to remain so: that was evident from both letters. And as
the certainty of his son’s acquiescence once more penetrated Campton it
brought with it a fresh reaction of shame. Ashamed?yes, he had begun to
be ashamed of George as well as of himself. Under the touch of Adele
Anthony’s implacable honesty his last pretenses shrivelled up, and he
longed to abase himself. He lifted his head and looked at her,
remembering all she would be able to read in his eyes.

“You’re satisfied?” she enquired.

“Yes. If that’s the word.” He stretched his hand toward her, and then
drew it back. “But it’s _not_: it’s not the word any longer.” He
laboured with the need of self-expression, and the opposing instinct of
concealing feelings too complex for Miss Anthony’s simple gaze. How
could he say: “I’m satisfied; but I wish to God that George were not”?
And was he satisfied, after all? And how could he define, or even be
sure that he was actually experiencing, a feeling so contradictory that
it seemed to be made up of anxiety for his son’s safety, shame at that
anxiety, shame at George’s own complacent acceptance of his lot, and
terror of a possible change in that lot? There were hours when it seemed
to Campton that the Furies were listening, and ready to fling their
awful answer to him if he as much as whispered to himself: “Would to God
that George were not satisfied!”

The sense of their haunting presence laid its clutch on him, and caused
him, after a pause, to finish his phrase in another tone. “No;
satisfied’s not the word; I’m _glad_ George is out of it!” he exclaimed.

Miss Anthony was folding away the letter as calmly as if it had been a
refugee record. She did not appear to notice the change in Campton’s
voice.

“I don’t pretend to your sublime detachment: you’ve never had a child,”
he sneered. (Certainly, if the Furies were listening, they would put
that down to his credit!)

“Oh, my poor John,” she said; then she locked the desk, took her hat
from the lamp-chimney on which it had been hanging, jammed it down on
her head like a helmet, and remarked: “We’ll go together, shall we? It’s
time I got back to the office.”

On the way downstairs both were silent. Campton’s ears echoed with his
stupid taunt, and he glanced at her without daring to speak. On the last
landing she paused and said: “I’ll see Julia this evening about George’s
change of address. She may be worried; and I can explain?I can take her
my letter.”

“Oh, do,” he assented. “And tell her?tell her?if she needs me??”

It was as much of a message as he found courage for. Miss Anthony
nodded.




                                  XIX


One day Mme. Lebel said: “The first horse-chestnuts are in bloom. And
monsieur must really buy himself some new shirts.”

Campton looked at her in surprise. She spoke in a different voice; he
wondered if she had had good news of her grandchildren. Then he saw that
the furrows in her old face were as deep as ever, and that the change in
her voice was simply an unconscious response to the general stirring of
sap, the spring need to go on living, through everything and in spite of
everything.

_On se fait une raison_, as Mme. Lebel would have said. Life had to go
on, and new shirts had to be bought. No one knew why it was necessary,
but every one felt that it was; and here were the horse-chestnuts once
more actively confirming it. Habit laid its compelling grasp on the
wires of the poor broken marionettes with which the Furies had been
playing, and they responded, though with feebler flappings, to the
accustomed jerk.

In Campton the stirring of the sap had been a cold and languid process,
chiefly felt in his reluctance to go on with his relief work. He had
tried to close his ears to the whispers of his own lassitude, vexed,
after the first impulse of self-dedication, to find that no vocation
declared itself, that his task became each day more tedious as well as
more painful. Theoretically, the pain ought to have stimulated him:
perpetual immersion in that sea of anguish should have quickened his
effort to help the poor creatures sinking under its waves. The woe of
the war had had that effect on Adele Anthony, on young Boylston, on
Mlle. Davril, on the greater number of his friends. But their ardour
left him cold. He wanted to help, he wanted it, he was sure, as
earnestly as they; but the longing was not an inspiration to him, and he
felt more and more that to work listlessly was to work ineffectually.

“I give the poor devils so many boots and money-orders a day; you give
them yourself, and so does Boylston,” he complained to Miss Anthony; who
murmured: “Ah, _Boylston_??” as if that point of the remark were alone
worth noticing.

“At his age too; it’s extraordinary, the way the boy’s got out of
himself.”

“Or into himself, rather. He _was_ a pottering boy before?now he’s a
man, with a man’s sense of things.”

“Yes; but his patience, his way of getting into their minds, their
prejudices, their meannesses, their miseries! He doesn’t seem to me like
the kind who was meant to be a missionary.”

“Not a bit of it.... But he’s burnt up with shame at our not being in
the war?as all the young Americans are.”

Campton made an impatient movement. “Benny Upsher again??! Can’t we let
our government decide all that for us? What else did we elect it for, I
wonder?”

“I wonder,” echoed Miss Anthony.

Talks of this kind were irritating and unprofitable, and Campton did not
again raise the question. Miss Anthony’s vision was too simplifying to
penetrate far into his doubts, and after nearly a year’s incessant
contact with the most savage realities her mind still seemed at ease in
its old formulas.

Simplicity, after all, was the best safeguard in such hours. Mrs. Brant
was as absorbed in her task as Adele Anthony. Since the Brant villa at
Deauville had been turned into a hospital she was always on the road, in
a refulgent new motor emblazoned with a Red Cross, carrying supplies,
rushing down with great surgeons, hurrying back to committee meetings
and conferences with the Service de Sante (for she and Mr. Brant were
now among the leaders in American relief work in Paris), and throwing
open the Avenue Marigny drawing-rooms for concerts, lectures and such
sober philanthropic gaieties as society was beginning to countenance.

On the day when Mme. Lebel told Campton that the horse-chestnuts were in
blossom and he must buy some new shirts he was particularly in need of
such incentives. He had made up his mind to go to see Mrs. Brant about a
concert for “The Friends of French Art” which was to be held in her
house. Ever since George had asked him to see something of his mother
Campton had used the pretext of charitable collaboration as the best way
of getting over their fundamental lack of anything to say to each other.

The appearance of the Champs Elysees confirmed Mme. Lebel’s
announcement. Everywhere the punctual rosy spikes were rising above
unfolding green; and Campton, looking up at them, remembered once
thinking how Nature had adapted herself to the scene in overhanging with
her own pink lamps and green fans the lamps and fans of the _cafes
chantants_ beneath. The latter lights had long since been extinguished,
the fans folded up; and as he passed the bent and broken arches of
electric light, the iron chairs and dead plants in paintless boxes, all
heaped up like the scenery of a bankrupt theatre, he felt the pang of
Nature’s obstinate renewal in a world of death. Yet he also felt the
stir of the blossoming trees in the form of a more restless discontent,
a duller despair, a new sense of inadequacy. How could war go on when
spring had come?

Mrs. Brant, having reduced her household and given over her
drawing-rooms to charity, received in her boudoir, a small room
contrived by a clever upholsterer to simulate a seclusion of which she
had never felt the need. Photographs strewed the low tables; and facing
the door Campton saw George’s last portrait, in uniform, enclosed in an
expensive frame. Campton had received the same photograph, and thrust it
into a drawer; he thought a young man on a safe staff job rather
ridiculous in uniform, and at the same time the sight filled him with a
secret dread.

Mrs. Brant was bidding goodbye to a lady in mourning whom Campton did
not know. His approach through the carpeted antechamber had been
unnoticed, and as he entered the room he heard Mrs. Brant say in French,
apparently in reply to a remark of her visitor: “Bridge, _chere Madame_?
No; not yet. I confess I haven’t the courage to take up my old life. We
mothers with sons at the front....”

“Ah,” exclaimed the other lady, “there I don’t agree with you. I think
one owes it to them to go on as if one were as little afraid as _they_
are. That is what all my sons prefer.... Even,” she added, lowering her
voice but lifting her head higher, “even, I’m sure, the one who is
buried by the Marne.” With a flush on her handsome face she pressed Mrs.
Brant’s hand and passed out.

Mrs. Brant had caught sight of Campton as she received the rebuke. Her
colour rose slightly, and she said with a smile: “So many women can’t
get on without amusement.”

“No,” he agreed. There was a pause, and then he asked: “Who was it?”

“The Marquise de Tranlay?the widow.”

“Where are the sons she spoke of?”

“There are three left: one in the _Chasseurs a Pied_; the youngest, who
volunteered at seventeen, in the artillery in the Argonne; the third,
badly wounded, in hospital at Compiegne. And the eldest killed. I simply
can’t understand....”

“Why,” Campton interrupted, “did you speak as if George were at the
front? Do you usually speak of him in that way?”

Her silence and her deepening flush made him feel the unkindness of the
question. “I didn’t mean ... forgive me,” he said. “Only sometimes, when
I see women like that I’m??”

“Well?” she questioned.

He was silent in his turn, and she did not insist. They sat facing each
other, each forgetting the purpose of their meeting. For the hundredth
time he felt the uselessness of trying to carry out George’s filial
injunction: between himself and George’s mother these months of fiery
trial seemed to have loosed instead of tightening the links.

He wandered back to Montmartre through the bereft and beautiful city.
The light lay on it in wide silvery washes, harmonizing the grey stone,
the pale foliage, and a sky piled with clouds which seemed to rebuild in
translucid masses the monuments below. He caught himself once more
viewing the details of the scene in the terms of his trade. River,
pavements, terraces heavy with trees, the whole crowded sky-line from
Notre Dame to the Pantheon, instead of presenting themselves in their
bare reality, were transposed into a painter’s vision. And the faces
around him became again the starting-point of rapid incessant
combinations of line and colour, as if the visible world were once more
at its old trick of weaving itself into magic designs. The reawakening
of this instinct deepened Campton’s sense of unrest, and made him feel
more than ever unfitted for a life in which such things were no longer
of account, in which it seemed a disloyalty even to think of them.

He returned to the studio, having promised to deal with some office work
which he had carried home the night before. The papers lay on the table;
but he turned to the window and looked out over his budding lilacs at
the new strange Paris. He remembered that it was almost a year since he
had leaned in the same place, gazing down on the wise and frivolous old
city in her summer dishabille while he planned his journey to Africa
with George; and something George had once quoted from Faust came
drifting through his mind: “Take care! You’ve broken my beautiful world!
There’ll be splinters....” Ah, yes, splinters, splinters ... everybody’s
hands were red with them! What retribution devised by man could be
commensurate with the crime of destroying his beautiful world? Campton
sat down to the task of collating office files.

His bell rang, and he started up, as much surprised as if the simplest
events had become unusual. It would be natural enough that Dastrey or
Boylston should drop in?or even Adele Anthony?but his heart beat as if
it might be George. He limped to the door, and found Mrs. Talkett.

She said: “May I come in?” and did so without waiting for his answer.
The rapidity of her entrance surprised him less than the change in her
appearance. But for the one glimpse of her dishevelled elegance, when
she had rushed into Mrs. Brant’s drawing-room on the day after war was
declared, he had seen her only in a nursing uniform, as absorbed in her
work as if it had been a long-thwarted vocation. Now she stood before
him in raiment so delicately springlike that it seemed an emanation of
the day. Care had dropped from her with her professional garb, and she
smiled as though he must guess the reason.

In ordinary times he would have thought: “She’s in love??” but that
explanation was one which seemed to belong to other days. It reminded
him, however, how little he knew of Mrs. Talkett, who, after Rene
Davril’s death, had vanished from his life as abruptly as she had
entered it. Allusions to “the Talketts,” picked up now and again at
Adele Anthony’s, led him to conjecture an invisible husband in the
background; but all he knew of Mrs. Talkett was what she had told him of
her “artistic” yearnings, and what he had been able to divine from her
empty questioning eyes, from certain sweet inflections when she spoke of
her wounded soldiers, and from the precise and finished language with
which she clothed her unfinished and imprecise thoughts. All these
indications made up an image not unlike that of the fashion-plate torn
from its context of which she had reminded him at their first meeting;
and he looked at her with indifference, wondering why she had come.

With an abrupt gesture she pulled the pin from her heavily-plumed hat,
tossed it on the divan, and said: “Dear Master, I just want to sit with
you and have you talk to me.” She dropped down beside her hat, clasped
her thin hands about her thin knee, and broke out, as if she had already
forgotten that she wanted him to talk to her: “Do you know, I’ve made up
my mind to begin to live again?to live my own life, I mean, to be my
real _me_, after all these dreadful months of exile from myself. I see
now _that_ that is my real duty?just as it is yours, just as it is that
of every artist and every creator. Don’t you feel as I do? Don’t you
agree with me? We _must_ save Beauty for the world; before it is too
late we must save it out of this awful wreck and ruin. It sounds
ridiculously presumptuous, doesn’t it, to say ‘we’ in talking of a great
genius like you and a poor little speck of dust like me? But after all
there is the same instinct in us, the same craving, the same desire to
realize Beauty, though you do it so magnificently and so?so objectively,
and I ...” she paused, unclasped her hands, and lifted her lovely
bewildered eyes, “I do it only by a ribbon in my hair, a flower in a
vase, a way of looping a curtain, or placing a lacquer screen in the
right light. But I oughtn’t to be ashamed of my limitations, do you
think I ought? Surely every one ought to be helping to save Beauty;
every one is needed, even the humblest and most ignorant of us, or else
the world will be all death and ugliness. And after all, ugliness is the
only _real_ death, isn’t it?” She drew a deep breath and added: “It has
done me good already to sit here and listen to you.”

Campton, a few weeks previously, would have been amused, or perhaps
merely irritated. But in the interval he had become aware in himself of
the same irresistible craving to “live,” as she put it, and as he had
heard it formulated, that very day, by the mourning mother who had so
sharply rebuked Mrs. Brant. The spring was stirring them all in their
different ways, secreting in them the sap which craved to burst into
bridge-parties, or the painting of masterpieces, or a consciousness of
the need for new shirts.

“But what am I in all this?” Mrs. Talkett rushed on, sparing him the
trouble of a reply. “Nothing but the match that lights the flame!
Sometimes I imagine that I might put what I mean into poetry ... I
_have_ scribbled a few things, you know ... but that’s not what I was
going to tell you. It’s you, dear Master, who must set us the example of
getting back to our work, our real work, whatever it is. What have you
done in all these dreadful months?the real You? Nothing! And the world
will be the poorer for it ever after. Master, you must paint again?you
must begin to-day!”

Campton gave an uneasy laugh. “Oh?paint!” He waved his hand toward the
office files of “The Friends of French Art.” “There’s my work.”

“Not the real you. It’s your dummy’s work?just as my nursing has been
mine. Oh, one did one’s best?but all the while beauty and art and the
eternal things were perishing! And what will the world be like without
them?”

“I shan’t be here,” Campton growled.

“But your son will.” She looked at him profoundly. “You know I know your
son?we’re friends. And I’m sure he would feel as I feel?he would tell
you to go back to your painting.”

For months past any allusion to George had put Campton on his guard,
stiffening him with improvised defences. But this appeal of Mrs.
Talkett’s found him unprepared, demoralized by the spring sweetness, and
by his secret sense of his son’s connivance with it. What was war?any
war?but an old European disease, an ancestral blood-madness seizing on
the first pretext to slake its frenzy? Campton reminded himself again
that he was the son of free institutions, of a country in no way
responsible for the centuries of sinister diplomacy which had brought
Europe to ruin, and was now trying to drag down America. George was
right, the Brants were right, this young woman through whose lips
Campton’s own secret instinct spoke was right.

He was silent so long that she rose with the anxious frown that appeared
to be her way of blushing, and faltered out: “I’m boring you?I’d better
go.”

She picked up her hat and held its cataract of feathers poised above her
slanted head.

“Wait?let me do you like that!” Campton cried. It had never before
occurred to him that she was paintable; but as she stood there with
uplifted arm the long line flowing from her wrist to her hip suddenly
wound itself about him like a net.

“Me?” she stammered, standing motionless, as if frightened by the excess
of her triumph.

“Do you mind?” he queried; and hardly hearing her faltered out: “Mind?
When it was what I came for!” he dragged forth an easel, flung on it the
first canvas he could lay hands on (though he knew it was the wrong
shape and size), and found himself instantly transported into the lost
world which was the only real one.




                                   XX


For a month Campton painted on in transcendent bliss.

His first stroke carried him out of space and time, into a region where
all that had become numbed and atrophied in him could expand and
breathe. Lines, images, colours were again the sole facts: he plunged
into their whirling circles like a stranded sea-creature into the sea.
Once more every face was not a vague hieroglyph, a curtain drawn before
an invisible aggregate of wants and woes, but a work of art, a flower in
a pattern, to be dealt with on its own merits, like a bronze or a jewel.
During the first day or two his hand halted; but the sense of
insufficiency was a goad, and he fought with his subject till he felt a
strange ease in every renovated muscle, and his model became like a
musical instrument on which he played with careless mastery.

He had transferred his easel to Mrs. Talkett’s apartment. It was an odd
patchwork place, full of bold beginnings and doubtful pauses, rash
surrenders to the newest fashions and abrupt insurrections against them,
where Louis Philippe mahogany had entrenched itself against the
aggression of _art nouveau_ hangings, and the frail grace of
eighteenth-century armchairs shed derision on lumpy modern furniture
painted like hobby-horses at a fair. It amused Campton to do Mrs.
Talkett against such a background: her thin personality needed to be
filled out by the visible results of its many quests and cravings. There
were people one could sit down before a blank wall, and all their world
was there, in the curves of their faces and the way their hands lay in
their laps; others, like Mrs. Talkett, seemed to be made out of the
reflection of what surrounded them, as if they had been born of a tricky
grouping of looking-glasses, and would vanish if it were changed.

At first Campton was steeped in the mere sensual joy of his art; but
after a few days the play of the mirrors began to interest him. Mrs.
Talkett had abandoned her hospital work, and was trying, as she said, to
“recreate herself.” In this she was aided by a number of people who
struck Campton as rather too young not to have found some other job, or
too old to care any longer for that particular one. But all this did not
trouble his newly recovered serenity. He seemed to himself, somehow,
like a drowned body?but drowned in a toy aquarium?still staring about
with living eyes, but aware of the other people only as shapes swimming
by with a flash of exotic fins. They were enclosed together, all of
them, in an unreal luminous sphere, mercifully screened against the
reality from which a common impulse of horror had driven them; and since
he was among them it was not his business to wonder at the others. So,
through the cloud of his art, he looked out on them impartially.

The high priestess of the group was Mme. de Dolmetsch, with Harvey
Mayhew as her acolyte. Mr. Mayhew was still in pursuit of Atrocities: he
was in fact almost the only member of the group who did not rather
ostentatiously disavow the obligation to “carry on.” But he had
discovered that to discharge this sacred task he must vary it by
frequent intervals of relaxation. He explained to Campton that he had
found it to be “his duty to rest”; and he was indefatigable in the
performance of duty. He had therefore, with an expenditure of eloquence
which Campton thought surprisingly slight, persuaded Boylston to become
his understudy, and devote several hours a day to the whirling
activities of the shrimp-pink Bureau of Atrocities at the Nouveau Luxe.
Campton, at first, could not understand how the astute Boylston had
allowed himself to be drawn into the eddy; but it turned out that
Boylston’s astuteness had drawn him in. “You see, there’s an awful lot
of money to be got out of it, one way and another, and I know a use for
every penny?that is, Miss Anthony and I do,” the young man modestly
explained; adding, in response to the painter’s puzzled stare, that Mr.
Mayhew’s harrowing appeals were beginning to bring from America immense
sums for the Victims, and that Mr. Mayhew, while immensely gratified by
the effect of his eloquence, and the prestige it was bringing him in
French social and governmental circles, had not the cloudiest notion how
the funds should be used, and had begged Boylston to advise him. It was
owing to this that the ex-Delegate to the Hague was able, with a light
conscience, to seek the repose of Mrs. Talkett’s company and, with a
smile of the widest initiation, to listen to the subversive conversation
of her familiars.

“Subversive” was the motto of the group. Every one was engaged in
attacking some theory of art or life or letters which nobody in
particular defended. Even Mr. Talkett?a kindly young man with
eye-glasses and glossy hair, who roamed about straightening the
furniture, like a gentlemanly detective watching the presents at a
wedding?owned to Campton that _he_ was subversive; and on the painter’s
pressing for a definition, added: “Why, I don’t believe in anything
_she_ doesn’t believe in,” while his eye-glasses shyly followed his
wife’s course among the teacups.

Mme. de Dolmetsch, though obviously anxious to retain her hold on Mr.
Mayhew, did not restrict herself to such mild fare, but exercised her
matchless eyes on a troop of followers: the shock-haired pianist who
accompanied her recitations, a straight-backed young American
diplomatist whose collars seemed a part of his career, a lustrous South
American millionaire, and a short squat Sicilian who designed the
costumes for the pianist’s unproduced ballets.

All these people appeared to believe intensely in each other’s reality
and importance; but it gradually came over Campton that all of them,
excepting their host and hostess, knew that they were merely
masquerading.

To Campton, used to the hard-working world of art, this playing at
Bohemia seemed a nursery-game; but the scene acquired an unexpected
solidity from the appearance in it, one day, of the banker Jorgenstein,
who strolled in as naturally as if he had been dropping into Campton’s
studio to enquire into the progress of his own portrait.

“I must come and look you up, Campton?get you to finish me,” he said
jovially, tapping his fat boot with a malacca stick as he looked over
the painter’s head at the canvas on which Mrs. Talkett’s restless image
seemed to flutter like a butterfly impaled.

“You’ll owe it to _me_ if he does you,” the sitter declared, smiling
back at the leer which Campton divined behind his shoulder; and he felt
a sudden pity for her innocence.

“My wife made Campton come back to his real work?doing his bit, you
know,” said Mr. Talkett, straightening a curtain and disappearing again,
like a diving animal; and Mrs. Talkett turned her plaintive eyes on
Campton. “That kind of idiocy is all I’ve ever had,” they seemed to say;
and he nearly cried back to her: “But, you poor child, it’s the only
honest thing anywhere near you!”

Absorbed in his picture, he hardly stopped to wonder at Jorgenstein’s
reappearance, at his air of bloated satisfaction or his easy allusions
to Cabinet Ministers and eminent statesmen. The atmosphere of the
Talkett house was so mirage-like that even the big red bulk of the
international financier became imponderable in it.

But one day Campton, on his way home, ran across Dastrey, and remembered
that they had not met for weeks. The ministerial drudge looked worn and
preoccupied, and Campton was abruptly recalled to the world he had been
trying to escape from.

“You seem rather knocked-up?what’s wrong with you?”

Dastrey stared. “Wrong with me? Well?did you like the communique this
morning?”

“I didn’t read it,” said Campton curtly. They walked along a few steps
in silence.

“You see,” the painter continued, “I’ve gone back to my job?my painting.
I suddenly found I had to.”

Dastrey glanced at him with surprising kindliness. “Ah, that’s good
news, my dear fellow!”

“You think so?” Campton half-sneered.

“Of course?why not? What are you painting? May I come and see?”

“Naturally.” Campton paused. “The fact is, I was bitten the other day
with a desire to depict that little will-o’-the-wisp of a Mrs. Talkett.
Come to her house any afternoon and I’ll show you the thing.”

“To her house?” Dastrey paused with a frown. “Then the picture’s
finished?”

“No?not by a long way. I’m doing it there?in her _milieu_, among her
crowd. It amuses me; they amuse me. When will you come?” He shot out the
sentences like challenges; and his friend took them up in the same tone.

“To Mrs. Talkett’s?to meet her crowd? Thanks?I’m too much tied down by
my job.”

“No; you’re not. You’re too disapproving,” said Campton quarrelsomely.
“You think we’re all a lot of shirks, of drones, of international
loafers?I don’t know what you call us. But I’m one of them, so whatever
name you give them I must answer to. Well, I’ll tell you what they are,
my dear fellow?and I’m not ashamed to be among them: they’re people
who’ve resolutely, unanimously, unshakeably decided, for a certain
number of hours each day, to forget the war, to ignore it, to live as if
it were not and never had been, so that??”

“So that?”

“So that beauty shall not perish from the earth!” Campton shouted,
bringing his stick down with a whack on the pavement.

Dastrey broke into a laugh. “_Allons donc!_ Decided to forget the war?
Why, bless your heart, they’ve never, not one of ’em, ever been able to
remember it for an hour together; no, not from the first day, except as
it interfered with their plans or cut down their amusements or increased
their fortunes. You’re the only one of them, my dear chap, (since you
class yourself among them) of whom what you’ve just said is true; and if
you can forget the war while you’re at your work, so much the better for
you and for us and for posterity; and I hope you’ll paint all Mrs.
Talkett’s crowd, one after another. Though I doubt if they’re as good
subjects now as when you caught them last July with the war-funk on.” He
held out his hand with a dry smile. “Goodbye. I’m off to meet my nephew,
who’s here on leave.”

He hastened away, leaving Campton in a crumbled world. Louis Dastrey on
leave? But that was because he was at the front, the real front, in the
trenches, had already had a slight wound and a fine citation.
Staff-officers, as George had wisely felt, were not asking for leave
just yet....

The thoughts excited by this encounter left Campton more than ever
resolved to drug himself with work and frivolity. It was none of his
business to pry into the consciences of the people about him, not even
into Jorgenstein’s?into which one would presumably have had to be let
down in a diver’s suit, with oxygen pumping at top pressure. If the
government tolerated Jorgenstein’s presence in France, probably on the
ground that he could be useful?so the banker himself let it be known?it
was silly of people like Adele Anthony and Dastrey to wince at the mere
mention of his name. There woke in Campton all the old spirit of aimless
random defiance?revolt for revolt’s sake?which had marked the first
period of his life after his separation from his wife. He had long since
come to regard it as a crude and juvenile phase?yet here he was reliving
it.

Though he knew of the intimacy between Mrs. Talkett and the Brants he
had no fear of meeting Julia: it was impossible to picture her neat head
battling with the blasts of that dishevelled drawing-room. But though
she did not appear there, he heard her more and more often alluded to,
in terms of startling familiarity, by Mrs. Talkett’s visitors. It was
clear that they all saw her, chiefly in her own house, that they thought
her, according to their respective vocabularies, “a perfect dear,” “_une
femme exquise_” or “_une bonne vieille_” (ah, poor Julia!); and that
their sudden enthusiasm for her was not uninspired by the fact that she
had got her marvellous _chef_ demobilised, and was giving little
“war-dinners” followed by a quiet turn at bridge.

Campton remembered Mme. de Tranlay’s rebuke to Mrs. Brant on the day
when he had last called in the Avenue Marigny; then he remembered also
that it was on that very day that he had returned to his painting.

“After all, she held out longer than I did?poor Julia!” he mused,
annoyed at the idea of her being the complacent victim of all the
voracities he saw about him, and yet reflecting that she was at last
living her life, as they called it at Mrs. Talkett’s. After all, the
fact that George was not at the front seemed to exonerate his
parents?unless, indeed, it did just the opposite.

One day, coming earlier than usual to Mrs. Talkett’s to put in a last
afternoon’s work on her portrait, Campton, to his surprise, found his
wife in front of it. Equally to his surprise he noticed that she was
dressed with a juvenility quite new to her; and for the first time he
thought she looked old-fashioned and also old. She met him with her
usual embarrassment.

“I didn’t know you came as early as this. Madge told me I might just run
in??” She waved her hand toward the portrait.

“I hope you like it,” he said, suddenly finding that he didn’t.

“It’s marvellous?marvellous.” She looked at him timidly. “It’s
extraordinary, how you’ve caught her rhythm, her _tempo_,” she ventured
in the jargon of the place. Campton, to hide a smile, turned away to get
his brushes. “I’m so glad,” she continued hastily, “that you’ve begun to
paint again. We all need to ... to....”

“Oh, not you and I, do we?” he rejoined with a scornful laugh.

She evidently caught the allusion, for she blushed all over her
uncovered neck, up through the faintly wrinkled cheeks to the roots of
her newly dyed hair; then he saw her eyes fill.

“What’s she crying for? Because George is _not_ in danger?” he wondered,
busying himself with his palette.

Mrs. Talkett hurried in with surprise and apologies; and one by one the
habitues followed, with cheery greetings for Mrs. Brant and a moment of
constraint as they noted Campton’s presence, and the relation between
the two was mutely passed about. Then the bridge-tables were brought,
Mr. Talkett began to straighten the cards nervously, and the guests
broke up into groups, forgetting everything but their own affairs. As
Campton turned back to his work he was aware of a last surprise in the
sight of Mrs. Brant serene and almost sparkling, waving her adieux to
the bridge-tables, and going out followed by Jorgenstein, with whom she
seemed on terms of playful friendliness. Of all strange war
promiscuities, Campton thought this the strangest.




                                  XXI


The next time Campton saw Mrs. Brant was in his own studio.

He was preparing, one morning, to leave the melancholy place, when the
bell rang and his _bonne_ let her in. Her dress was less frivolous than
at Mrs. Talkett’s, and she wore a densely patterned veil, like the
ladies in cinema plays when they visit their seducers or their
accomplices.

Through the veil she looked at him agitatedly, and said: “George is not
at Sainte Menehould.”

He stared.

“No. Anderson was there the day before yesterday.”

“Brant? At Sainte Menehould?” Campton felt the blood rush to his
temples. What! He, the boy’s father, had not so much as dared to ask for
the almost unattainable permission to go into the war-zone; and this
other man, who was nothing to George, absolutely nothing, who had no
right whatever to ask for leave to visit him, had somehow obtained the
priceless favour, and instead of passing it on, instead of offering at
least to share it with the boy’s father, had sneaked off secretly to
feast on the other’s lawful privilege!

“How the devil???” Campton burst out.

“Oh, he got a Red Cross mission; it was arranged very suddenly?through a
friend....”

“Yes?well?” Campton stammered, sitting down lest his legs should fail
him, and signing to her to take a chair.

“Well?he was not there!” she repeated excitedly. “It’s what we might
have known?since he’s changed his address.”

“Then he didn’t see him?” Campton interrupted, the ferocious joy of the
discovery crowding out his wrath and wonder.

“Anderson didn’t? No. He wasn’t there, I tell you!”

“The H.Q. has been moved?”

“No, it hasn’t. Anderson saw one of the officers. He said George had
been sent on a mission.”

“To another H.Q.?”

“That’s what they said. I don’t believe it.”

“What do you believe?”

“I don’t know. Anderson’s sure they told him the truth. The officer he
saw is a friend of George’s, and he said George was expected back that
very evening.”

Campton sat looking at her uncertainly. Did she dread, or did she rather
wish, to disbelieve the officer’s statement? Where did she hope or fear
that George had gone? And what were Campton’s own emotions? As confused,
no doubt, as hers?as undefinable. The insecurity of his feelings moved
him to a momentary compassion for hers, which were surely pitiable,
whatever else they were. Then a savage impulse swept away every other,
and he said: “Wherever George was, Brant’s visit will have done him no
good.”

She grew pale. “What do you mean?”

“I wonder it never occurred to you?or to your husband, since he’s so
solicitous,” Campton went on, prolonging her distress.

“Please tell me what you mean,” she pleaded with frightened eyes.

“Why, in God’s name, couldn’t you both let well enough alone? Didn’t you
guess why George never asked for leave?why I’ve always advised him not
to? Don’t you know that nothing is as likely to get a young fellow into
trouble as having his family force their way through to see him, use
influence, seem to ask favours? I dare say that’s how that fool of a
Dolmetsch woman got Isador killed. No one would have noticed where he
was if she hadn’t gone on so about him. They _had_ to send him to the
front finally. And now the chances are??”

“Oh, no, no, no?don’t say it!” She held her hands before her face as if
he had flung something flaming at her. “It was I who made Anderson go!”

“Well?Brant ought to have thought of that?_I_ did,” he pursued
sardonically.

Her answer disarmed him. “You’re his father.”

“I don’t mean,” he went on hastily, “that Brant’s not right: of course
there’s nothing to be afraid of. I can’t imagine why you thought there
was.”

She hung her head. “Sometimes when I hear the other women?other
mothers?I feel as if our turn must come too. Even at Sainte Menehould a
shell might hit the house. Anderson said the artillery fire seemed so
near.”

He made no answer, and she sat silent, without apparent thought of
leaving. Finally he said: “I was just going out??”

She stood up. “Oh, yes?that reminds me. I came to ask you to come with
me.”

“With you???”

“The motor’s waiting?you must.” She laid her hand on his arm. “To see
Olida, the new _clairvoyante_. Everybody goes to her?everybody who’s
anxious about anyone. Even the scientific people believe in her. She’s
told people the most extraordinary things?it seems she warned Daisy de
Dolmetsch.... Well, I’d _rather_ know!” she burst out passionately.

Campton smiled. “She’ll tell you that George is back at his desk.”

“Well, then?isn’t that worth it? Please don’t refuse me!”

He disengaged himself gently. “My poor Julia, go by all means if it will
reassure you.”

“Ah, but you’ve got to come too. You can’t say no: Madge Talkett tells
me that if _the two nearest_ go together Olida sees so much more
clearly?especially a father and mother,” she added hastily, as if
conscious of the inopportune “nearest.” After a moment she went on:
“Even Mme. de Tranlay’s been; Daisy de Dolmetsch met her on the stairs.
Olida told her that her youngest boy, from whom she’d had no news for
weeks, was all right, and coming home on leave. Mme. de Tranlay didn’t
know Daisy, except by sight, but she stopped her to tell her. Only
fancy?the last person she would have spoken to in ordinary times! But
she was so excited and happy! And two days afterward the boy turned up
safe and sound. You must come!” she insisted.

Campton was seized with a sudden deep compassion for all these women
groping for a ray of light in the blackness. It moved him to think of
Mme. de Tranlay’s proud figure climbing a _clairvoyante’s_ stairs.

“I’ll come if you want me to,” he said.

They drove to the Batignolles quarter. Mrs. Brant’s lips were twitching
under her veil, and as the motor stopped she said childishly: “I’ve
never been to this kind of place before.”

“I should hope not,” Campton rejoined. He himself, during the Russian
lady’s rule, had served an apprenticeship among the soothsayers, and
come away disgusted with the hours wasted in their company. He suddenly
remembered the Spanish girl in the little white house near the railway,
who had told his fortune in the hot afternoons with cards and
olive-stones, and had found, by irrefutable signs, that he and she would
“come together” again. “Well, it was better than this pseudo-scientific
humbug,” he mused, “because it was picturesque?and so was she?and she
believed in it.”

Mrs. Brant rang, and Campton followed her into a narrow hall. A
servant-woman showed them into a _salon_ which was as commonplace as a
doctor’s waiting-room. On the mantelpiece were vases of Pampas grass,
and a stuffed monkey swung from the electrolier. Evidently Mme. Olida
was superior to the class of fortune-tellers who prepare a special
stage-setting, and no astrologer’s robe or witch’s kitchen was to be
feared.

The maid led them across a plain dining-room into an inner room. The
shutters were partly closed, and the blinds down. A voluminous woman in
loose black rose from a sofa. Gold earrings gleamed under her oiled
black hair?and suddenly, through the billows of flesh, and behind the
large pale mask, Campton recognized the Spanish girl who used to read
his fortune in the house by the railway. Her eyes rested a moment on
Mrs. Brant; then they met his with the same heavy stare. But he noticed
that her hands, which were small and fat, trembled a little as she
pointed to two chairs.

“Sit down, please,” she said in a low rough voice, speaking in French.
The door opened again, and a young man with Levantine eyes and a showy
necktie looked in. She said sharply: “No,” and he disappeared. Campton
noticed that a large emerald flashed on his manicured hand. Mme. Olida
continued to look at her visitors.

Mrs. Brant wiped her dry lips and stammered: “We’re his parents?a son at
the front....”

Mme. Olida fell back in a trance-like attitude, let her lips droop over
her magnificent eyes, and rested her head against a soiled sofa-pillow.
Presently she held out both hands.

“You are his parents? Yes? Give me each a hand, please.” As her
cushioned palm touched Campton’s he thought he felt a tremor of
recognition, and saw, in the half-light, the tremor communicate itself
to her lids. He grasped her hand firmly, and she lifted her eyes, looked
straight into his with her heavy velvety stare, and said: “You should
hold my hand more loosely; the currents must not be compressed.” She
turned her palm upward, so that his finger-tips rested on it as if on a
keyboard; he noticed that she did not do the same with the hand she had
placed in Mrs. Brant’s.

Suddenly he remembered that one sultry noon, lying under the olives, she
had taught him, by signals tapped on his own knee, how to say what he
chose to her without her brothers’ knowing it. He looked at the huge
woman, seeking the curve of the bowed upper lip on which what used to be
a faint blue shadow had now become a line as thick as her eyebrows, and
recalling how her laugh used to lift the lip above her little round
teeth while she threw back her head, showing the Agnus Dei in her neck.
Now her mouth was like a withered flower, and in a crease of her neck a
string of pearls was embedded.

“Take hands, please,” she commanded. Julia gave Campton her ungloved
hand, and he sat between the two women.

“You are the parents? You want news of your son?ah, like so many!” Mme.
Olida closed her eyes again.

“To know where he is?whereabouts?that is what we want,” Mrs. Brant
whispered.

Mme. Olida sat as if labouring with difficult visions. The noises of the
street came faintly through the closed windows and a smell of garlic and
cheap scent oppressed Campton’s lungs and awakened old associations.
With a final effort of memory he fixed his eyes on the _clairvoyante’s_
darkened mask, and tapped her palm once or twice. She neither stirred
nor looked at him.

“I see?I see??” she began in the consecrated phrase. “A veil?a thick
veil of smoke between me and a face which is young and fair, with a
short nose and reddish hair: thick, thick, thick hair, exactly like this
gentleman’s when he was young....”

Mrs. Brant’s hand trembled in Campton’s. “It’s true,” she whispered,
“before your hair turned grey it used to be as red as Georgie’s.”

“The veil grows denser?there are awful noises; there’s a face with
blood?but not that first face. This is a very young man, as innocent as
when he was born, with blue eyes like flax-flowers, but blood, blood ...
why do I see that face? Ah, now it is on a hospital pillow?not your
son’s face, the other; there is no one near, no one but some German
soldiers laughing and drinking; the lips move, the hands are stretched
out in agony; but no one notices. It is a face that has something to say
to the gentleman; not to you, Madame. The uniform is different?is it an
English uniform?... Ah, now the face turns grey; the eyes shut, there is
foam on the lips. Now it is gone?there’s another man’s head on the
pillow.... Now, now your son’s face comes back; but not near those
others. The smoke has cleared ... I see a desk and papers; your son is
writing....”

“Oh,” gasped Mrs. Brant.

“If you squeeze my hands you arrest the current,” Mme. Olida reminded
her. There was another interval; Campton felt his wife’s fingers beating
between his like trapped birds. The heat and darkness oppressed him;
beads of sweat came out on his forehead. Did the woman really see
things, and was that face with the blood on it Benny Upsher’s?

Mme. Olida droned on. “It is your son who is writing?the young man with
the very thick hair. He is writing to you?trying to explain something.
Perhaps you have hoped to see him lately? That is it; he is telling you
why it could not be. He is sitting quietly in a room. There is no
smoke.” She released Mrs. Brant’s hand and Campton’s. “Go home, Madame.
You are fortunate. Perhaps his letter will reach you to-morrow.”

Mrs. Brant stood up sobbing. She found her gold bag and pushed it toward
Campton. He had been feeling in his own pocket for money; but as he drew
it forth Mme. Olida put back his hand. “No. I am superstitious; it’s so
seldom that I can give good news. _Bonjour, madame, bonjour, monsieur._
I commend your son to the blessed Virgin and to all the saints and
angels.”

Campton put Julia into the motor. She was still crying, but her tears
were radiant. “Isn’t she wonderful? Didn’t you see how she seemed to
_recognize_ George? There’s no mistaking his hair! How could she have
known what it was like? Don’t think me foolish?I feel so comforted!”

“Of course; you’ll hear from him to-morrow,” Campton said. He was
touched by her maternal passion, and ashamed of having allowed her so
small a share in his jealous worship of his son. He walked away,
thinking of the young man dying in a German hospital, and of the other
man’s face succeeding his on the pillow.




                                  XXII


Two days later, to Campton’s surprise, Anderson Brant appeared in the
morning at the studio.

Campton, finishing a late breakfast in careless studio-garb, saw his
visitor peer cautiously about, as though fearing undressed models behind
the screens or empty beer-bottles under the tables. It was the first
time that Mr. Brant had entered the studio since his attempt to buy
George’s portrait, and Campton guessed at once that he had come again
about George.

He looked at the painter shyly, as if oppressed by the indiscretion of
intruding at that hour.

“It was my?Mrs. Brant who insisted?when she got this letter,” he brought
out between precautionary coughs.

Campton looked at him tolerantly: a barrier seemed to have fallen
between them since their brief exchange of words about Benny Upsher. The
letter, as Campton had expected, was a line from George to his mother,
written two days after Mr. Brant’s visit to Sainte Menehould. It
expressed, in George’s usual staccato style, his regret at having been
away. “Hard luck, when one is riveted to the same square yard of earth
for weeks on end, to have just happened to be somewhere else the day
Uncle Andy broke through.” It was always the same tone of fluent banter,
in which Campton fancied he detected a lurking stridency, like the
scrape of an overworked gramophone containing only comic disks.

“Ah, well?his mother must be satisfied,” Campton said as he gave the
letter back.

“Oh, completely. So much so that I’ve induced her to go off for a while
to Biarritz. The doctor finds her overdone; she’d got it into her head
that George had been sent to the front; I couldn’t convince her to the
contrary.”

Campton looked at him. “You yourself never believed it?”

Mr. Brant, who had half risen, as though feeling that his errand was
done, slid back into his seat and clasped his small hands on his
agate-headed stick.

“Oh, never.”

“It was not,” Campton pursued, “with that idea that you went to Sainte
Menehould?”

Mr. Brant glanced at him in surprise. “No. On the contrary??”

“On the contrary?”

“I understood from?from his mother that, in the circumstances, you were
opposed to his asking for leave; thought it unadvisable, that is. So, as
it was such a long time since we’d seen him??” The “we,” pulling him up
short, spread a brick-red blush over his baldness.

“Not longer than since I have?but then I’ve not your opportunities,”
Campton retorted, the sneer breaking out in spite of him. Though he had
grown kindly disposed toward Mr. Brant when they were apart, the old
resentments still broke out in his presence.

Mr. Brant clasped and unclasped the knob of his stick. “I took the first
chance that offered; I had his mother to think of.” Campton made no
answer, and he continued: “I was sorry to hear you thought I’d perhaps
been imprudent.”

“There’s no perhaps about it,” Campton retorted. “Since you say you were
not anxious about the boy I can’t imagine why you made the attempt.”

Mr. Brant was silent. He seemed overwhelmed by the other’s
disapprobation, and unable to find any argument in his own defence. “I
never dreamed it could cause any trouble,” he said at length.

“That’s the ground you’ve always taken in your interference with my
son!” Campton had risen, pushing back his chair, and Mr. Brant stood up
also. They faced each other without speaking.

“I’m sorry,” Mr. Brant began, “that you should take such a view. It
seemed to me natural ..., when Mr. Jorgenstein gave me the chance??”

“Jorgenstein! It was Jorgenstein who took you to the front? Took you to
see my son?” Campton threw his head back and laughed. “That’s
complete?that’s really complete!”

Mr. Brant reddened as if the laugh had been a blow. He stood very erect,
his lips as tightly closed as a shut penknife. He had the attitude of a
civilian under fire, considerably perturbed, but obliged to set the
example of fortitude.

Campton looked at him. At last he had Mr. Brant at a disadvantage. Their
respective situations were reversed, and he saw that the banker was
aware of it, and oppressed by the fear that he might have done harm to
George. He evidently wanted to say all this and did not know how.

His distress moved Campton, in whose ears the sound of his own outburst
still echoed unpleasantly. If only Mr. Brant would have kept out of his
way he would have found it so easy to be fair to him!

“I’m sorry,” he began in a quieter tone. “I dare say I’m unjust?perhaps
it’s in the nature of our relation. Can’t you understand how I’ve felt,
looking on helplessly all these years, while you’ve done for the boy
everything I wanted to do for him myself? Haven’t you guessed why I
jumped at my first success, and nursed my celebrity till I’d got half
the fools in Europe lining up to be painted?” His excitement was
mastering him again, and he went on hurriedly: “Do you suppose I’d have
wasted all these precious years over their stupid faces if I hadn’t
wanted to make my son independent of you? And he _would_ have been, if
the war hadn’t come; been my own son again and nobody else’s, leading
his own life, whatever he chose it to be, instead of having to waste his
youth in your bank, learning how to multiply your millions.”

The futility of this retrospect, and the inconsistency of his whole
attitude, exasperated Campton more than anything his visitor could do or
say, and he stopped, embarrassed by the sound of his own words, yet
seeing no escape save to bury them under more and more. But Mr. Brant
had opened his lips.

“They’ll be _his_, you know: the millions,” he said.

Campton’s anger dropped: he felt Mr. Brant at last too completely at his
mercy. He waited for a moment before speaking.

“You tried to buy his portrait once?you remember I told you it was not
for sale,” he then said.

Mr. Brant stood motionless, grasping his stick in one hand and stroking
his moustache with the other. For a while he seemed to be considering
Campton’s words without feeling their sting. “It was not the money ...”
he stammered out at length, from the depth of some unutterable plea for
understanding; then he added: “I wish you a good morning,” and walked
out with his little stiff steps.




                                 XXIII


Campton was thoroughly ashamed of what he had said to Mr. Brant, or
rather of his manner of saying it. If he could have put the same facts
quietly, ironically, without forfeiting his dignity, and with the added
emphasis which deliberateness and composure give, he would scarcely have
regretted the opportunity. He had always secretly accused himself of a
lack of courage in accepting Mr. Brant’s heavy benefactions for George
when the boy was too young to know what they might pledge him to; and it
had been a disappointment that George, on reaching the age of
discrimination, had not appeared to find the burden heavy, or the
obligations unpleasant.

Campton, having accepted Mr. Brant’s help, could hardly reproach his son
for feeling grateful for it, and had therefore thought it “more decent”
to postpone disparagement of their common benefactor till his own
efforts had set them both free. Even then, it would be impossible to pay
off the past?but the past might have been left to bury itself. Now his
own wrath had dug it up, and he had paid for the brief joy of casting
its bones in Mr. Brant’s face by a deep disgust at his own weakness.

All these things would have weighed on him even more if the outer weight
of events had not been so much heavier. He had not returned to Mrs.
Talkett’s since the banker’s visit; he did not wish to meet Jorgenstein,
and his talk with the banker, and his visit to the _clairvoyante_, had
somehow combined to send that whole factitious world tumbling about his
ears. It was absurd to attach any importance to poor Olida’s
vaticinations; but the vividness of her description of the baby-faced
boy dying in a German hospital haunted Campton’s nights. If it were not
the portrait of Benny Upsher it was at least that of hundreds and
thousands of lads like him, who were thus groping and agonizing and
stretching out vain hands, while in Mrs. Talkett’s drawing-room well-fed
men and expensive women heroically “forgot the war.” Campton, seeking to
expiate his own brief forgetfulness by a passion of renewed activity,
announced to Boylston the next afternoon that he was coming back to the
office.

Boylston hardly responded: he looked up from his desk with a face so
strange that Campton broke off to cry out: “What’s happened?”

The young man held out a newspaper. “They’ve done it?they’ve done it!”
he shouted. Across the page the name of the _Lusitania_ blazed out like
the writing on the wall.

The Berserker light on Boylston’s placid features transformed him into
an avenging cherub. “Ah, now we’re in it?we’re in it at last!” he
exulted, as if the horror of the catastrophe were already swallowed up
in its result. The two looked at each other without further words; but
the older man’s first thought had been for his son. Now, indeed, America
was “in it”: the gross tangible proof for which her government had
forced her to wait was there in all its unimagined horror. Cant and
cowardice in high places had drugged and stupefied her into the strange
belief that she was too proud to fight for others; and here she was
brutally forced to fight for herself. Campton waited with a straining
heart for his son’s first comment on the new fact that they were “in
it.”

But his excitement and Boylston’s exultation were short-lived. Before
many days it became apparent that the proud nation which had flamed up
overnight at the unproved outrage of the _Maine_ was lying supine under
the flagrant provocation of the _Lusitania_. The days which followed
were, to many Americans, the bitterest of the war: to Campton they
seemed the ironic justification of the phase of indifference and
self-absorption through which he had just passed. He could not go back
to Mrs. Talkett and her group; but neither could he take up his work
with even his former zeal. The bitter taste of the national humiliation
was perpetually on his lips: he went about like a man dishonoured.

He wondered, as the days and the weeks passed, at having no word from
George. Had he refrained from writing because he too felt the national
humiliation too deeply either to speak of it or to leave it unmentioned?
Or was he so sunk in security that he felt only a mean thankfulness that
nothing was changed? From such thoughts Campton’s soul recoiled; but
they lay close under the surface of his tenderness, and reared their
evil heads whenever they caught him alone.

As the summer dragged itself out he was more and more alone. Dastrey,
cured of his rheumatism, had left the Ministry to resume his ambulance
work. Miss Anthony was submerged under the ever-mounting tide of
refugees. Mrs. Brant had taken a small house at Deauville (on the
pretext of being near her hospital), and Campton heard of the Talketts’
being with her, and others of their set. Mr. Mayhew appeared at the
studio one day, in tennis flannels and a new straw hat, announcing that
he “needed rest,” and rather sheepishly adding that Mrs. Brant had
suggested his spending “a quiet fortnight” with her. “I’ve _got_ to do
it, if I’m to see this thing through,” Mr. Mayhew added in a stern
voice, as if commanding himself not to waver.

A few days later, glancing over the _Herald_, Campton read that Mme. de
Dolmetsch, “the celebrated _artiste_,” was staying with Mr. and Mrs.
Anderson Brant at Deauville, where she had gone to give recitations for
the wounded in hospital. Campton smiled, and then thought with a
tightening heart of Benny Upsher and Ladislas Isador, so incredibly
unlike in their lives, so strangely one in their death. Finally, not
long afterward, he read that the celebrated financier, Sir Cyril
Jorgenstein (recently knighted by the British Government) had bestowed a
gift of a hundred thousand francs upon Mrs. Brant’s hospital. It was
rumoured, the paragraph ended, that Sir Cyril would soon receive the
Legion of Honour for his magnificent liberalities to France.

And still the flood of war rolled on. Success here, failure there, the
menace of disaster elsewhere?Russia retreating to the San, Italy
declaring war on Austria and preparing to cross the Isonzo, the British
advance at Anzac, and from the near East news of the new landing at
Suvla. Through all this alternating of tragedy and triumph ran the
million and million individual threads of hope, fear, fortitude,
resolve, with which the fortune of the war was obscurely but fatally
interwoven. Campton remembered his sneer at Dastrey’s phrase: “One can
at least contribute an attitude.” He had begun to feel the force of
that, to understand the need of every human being’s “pulling his weight”
in the struggle, had begun to scan every face in the street in the
passionate effort to distinguish between the stones in the wall of
resistance and the cracks through which discouragement might filter.

The shabby office of the Palais Royal again became his only haven. His
portrait of Mrs. Talkett had brought him many new orders; but he refused
them all, and declined even to finish the pictures interrupted by the
war. One of his abrupt revulsions of feeling had flung him back, heart
and brain, into the horror he had tried to escape from. “If thou ascend
up into heaven I am there; if thou make thy bed in hell, behold I am
there,” the war said to him; and as the daily head-lines shrieked out
the names of new battle-fields, from the Arctic shore to the Pacific, he
groaned back like the Psalmist: “Whither shall I go from thee?”

The people about him?Miss Anthony, Boylston, Mlle. Davril, and all their
band of tired resolute workers?plodded ahead, their eyes on their task,
seeming to find in its fulfillment a partial escape from the intolerable
oppression. The women especially, with their gift of living in the
particular, appeared hardly aware of the appalling development of the
catastrophe; and Campton felt himself almost as lonely among these
people who thought of nothing but the war as among those who hardly
thought of it at all. It was only when he and Boylston, after a hard
morning’s work, went out to lunch together, that what he called the
_Lusitania look_, suddenly darkening the younger man’s face, moved the
painter with an anguish like his own.

Boylston, breaking through his habitual shyness, had one day
remonstrated with Campton for not going on with his painting: but the
latter had merely rejoined: “We’ve each of us got to worry through this
thing in our own way?” and the subject was not again raised between
them.

The intervals between George’s letters were growing longer. Campton, who
noted in his pocket-diary the dates of all that he received, as well as
those addressed to Mrs. Brant and Miss Anthony, had not had one to
record since the middle of June. And in that there was no allusion to
the _Lusitania_.

“It’s queer,” he said to Boylston, one day toward the end of July; “I
don’t know yet what George thinks about the _Lusitania_.”

“Oh, yes, you do, sir!” Boylston returned, laughing; “but all the mails
from the war-zone,” he added, “have been very much delayed lately. When
there’s a big attack on anywhere they hold up everything along the line.
And besides, no end of letters are lost.”

“I suppose so,” said Campton, pocketing the diary, and trying for the
millionth time to call up a vision of his boy, seated at a desk in some
still unvisualized place, his rumpled fair head bent above columns of
figures or files of correspondence, while day after day the roof above
him shook with the roar of the attacks which held up his letters.




                                BOOK III




                                  XXIV


The gates of Paris were behind them, and they were rushing through an
icy twilight between long lines of houses, factory chimneys and
city-girt fields, when Campton at last roused himself and understood.

It was he, John Campton, who sat in that car?that noiseless
swiftly-sliding car, so cushioned and commodious, so ingeniously fitted
for all the exigencies and emergencies of travel, that it might have
been a section of the Nouveau Luxe on wheels; and the figure next to
him, on the extreme other side of the deeply upholstered seat, was that
of Anderson Brant. This, for the moment, was as far as Campton’s dazed
perceptions carried him....

The motor was among real fields and orchards, and the icy half-light
which might just as well have been dusk was turning definitely to dawn,
when at last, disentangling his mind from a tight coil of passport and
permit problems, he thought: “But this is the road north of Paris?that
must have been St. Denis.”

Among all the multiplied strangenesses of the last strange hours it had
hardly struck him before that, now he was finally on his way to George,
it was not to the Argonne that he was going, but in the opposite
direction. The discovery held his floating mind for a moment, but for a
moment only, before it drifted away again, to be caught on some other
projecting strangeness.

Chief among these was Mr. Brant’s presence at his side, and the fact
that the motor they were sitting in was Mr. Brant’s. But Campton felt
that such enormities were not to be dealt with yet. He had neither slept
nor eaten since the morning before, and whenever he tried to grasp the
situation in its entirety his spirit fainted away again into outer
darkness....

His companion presently coughed, and said, in a voice even more than
usually colourless and expressionless: “We are at Luzarches already.”

It was the first time, Campton was sure, that Mr. Brant had spoken since
they had got into the car together, hours earlier as it seemed to him,
in the dark street before the studio in Montmartre; the first, at least,
except to ask, as the chauffeur touched the self-starter: “Will you have
the rug over you?”

The two travellers did not share a rug: a separate one, soft as fur and
light as down, lay neatly folded on the grey carpet before each seat;
but Campton, though the early air was biting, had left his where it lay,
and had not answered.

Now he was beginning to feel that he could not decently remain silent
any longer; and with an effort which seemed as mechanical and external
as the movements of the chauffeur whose back he viewed through the wide
single sheet of plate-glass, he brought out, like a far-off echo:
“Luzarches...?”

It was not that there lingered in him any of his old sense of antipathy
toward Mr. Brant. In the new world into which he had been abruptly
hurled, the previous morning, by the coming of that letter which looked
so exactly like any other letter?in this new world Mr. Brant was nothing
more than the possessor of the motor and of the “pull” that were to get
him, Campton, in the shortest possible time, to the spot of earth where
his son lay dying. Once assured of this, Campton had promptly and
indifferently acquiesced in Miss Anthony’s hurried suggestion that it
would be only decent to let Mr. Brant go to Doullens with him.

But the exchange of speech with any one, whether Mr. Brant or another,
was for the time being manifestly impossible. The effort, to Campton, to
rise out of his grief, was like that of a dying person struggling back
from regions too remote for his voice to reach the ears of the living.
He shrank into his corner, and tried once more to fix his attention on
the flying landscape.

All that he saw in it, speeding ahead of him even faster than their own
flight, was the ghostly vision of another motor, carrying a figure bowed
like his, mute like his: the figure of Fortin-Lescluze, as he had seen
it plunge away into the winter darkness after the physician’s son had
been killed. Campton remembered asking himself then, as he had asked
himself so often since: “How should I bear it if it happened to me?”

He knew the answer to that now, as he knew everything else a man could
know: so it had seemed to his astonished soul since the truth had
flashed at him out of that fatal letter. Ever since then he had been
turning about and about in a vast glare of initiation: of all the old
crowded misty world which the letter had emptied at a stroke, nothing
remained but a few memories of George’s boyhood, like a closet of toys
in a house knocked down by an earthquake.

The vision of Fortin-Lescluze’s motor vanished, and in its place Campton
suddenly saw Boylston’s screwed-up eyes staring out at him under furrows
of anguish. Campton remembered, the evening before, pushing the letter
over to him across the office table, and stammering: “Read it?read it to
me. I can’t??” and Boylston’s sudden sobbing explosion: “But I _knew_,
sir?I’ve known all along ...” and then the endless pause before Campton
gathered himself up to falter out (like a child deciphering the words in
a primer): “You _knew_?knew that George was wounded?”

“No, no, not that; but that he might be?oh, at any minute! Forgive
me?oh, do forgive me! He wouldn’t let me tell you that he was at the
front,” Boylston had faltered through his sobs.

“Let you tell me???”

“You and his mother: he refused a citation last March so that you
shouldn’t find out that he’d exchanged into an infantry regiment. He was
determined to from the first. He’s been fighting for months; he’s been
magnificent; he got away from the Argonne last February; but you were
none of you to know.”

“But why?why?why?” Campton had flashed out; then his heart stood still,
and he awaited the answer with lowered head.

“Well, you see, he was afraid: afraid you might prevent ... use your
influence ... you and Mrs. Brant....”

Campton looked up again, challenging the other. “He imagined perhaps
that we _had_?in the beginning?”

“Oh, yes”?Boylston was perfectly calm about it?“he knew all about that.
And he made us swear not to speak; Miss Anthony and me. Miss Anthony
knew.... If this thing happened,” Boylston ended in a stricken voice,
“you were not to be unfair to her, he said.”

Over and over again that short dialogue distilled itself syllable by
syllable, pang by pang, into Campton’s cowering soul. He had had to
learn all this, this overwhelming unbelievable truth about his son; and
at the same instant to learn that that son was grievously wounded,
perhaps dying (what else, in such circumstances, did the giving of the
Legion of Honour ever mean?); and to deal with it all in the wild
minutes of preparation for departure, of intercession with the
authorities, sittings at the photographer’s, and a crisscross of
confused telephone-calls from the Embassy, the Prefecture and the War
Office.

From this welter of images Miss Anthony’s face next detached itself:
white and withered, yet with a look which triumphed over its own ruin,
and over Campton’s wrath.

“Ah?you knew too, did you? You were his other confidant? How you all
kept it up?how you all lied to us!” Campton had burst out at her.

She took it firmly. “I showed you his letters.”

“Yes: the letters he wrote to you to be shown.”

She received this in silence, and he followed it up. “It was you who
drove him to the front?it was you who sent my son to his death!”

Without flinching, she gazed back at him. “Oh, John?it was you!”

“I?I? What do you mean? I never as much as lifted a finger??”

“No?” She gave him a wan smile. “Then it must have been the old man who
invented the Mangle!” she cried, and cast herself on Campton’s breast.
He held her there for a long moment, stroking her lank hair, and saying
“Adele?Adele,” because in that rush of understanding he could not think
of anything else to say. At length he stooped and laid on her lips the
strangest kiss he had ever given or taken; and it was then that, drawing
back, she exclaimed: “That’s for George, when you get to him. Remember!”

The image of George’s mother rose last on the whirling ground of
Campton’s thoughts: an uncertain image, blurred by distance, indistinct
as some wraith of Mme. Olida’s evoking.

Mrs. Brant was still at Biarritz; there had been no possibility of her
getting back in time to share the journey to the front. Even Mr. Brant’s
power in high places must have fallen short of such an attempt; and it
was not made. Boylston, despatched in haste to bear the news of George’s
wounding to the banker, had reported that the utmost Mr. Brant could do
was to write at once to his wife, and arrange for her return to Paris,
since telegrams to the frontier departments travelled more slowly than
letters, and in nine cases out of ten were delayed indefinitely. Campton
had asked no more at the time; but in the last moment before leaving
Paris he remembered having said to Adele Anthony: “You’ll be there when
Julia comes?” and Miss Anthony had nodded back: “At the station.”

The word, it appeared, roused the same memory in both of them; meeting
her eyes, he saw there the Gare de l’Est in the summer morning, the
noisily manœuvring trains jammed with bright young heads, the flowers,
the waving handkerchiefs, and everybody on the platform smiling fixedly
till some particular carriage-window slid out of sight. The scene, at
the time, had been a vast blur to Campton: would he ever again, he
wondered, see anything as clearly as he saw it now, in all its
unmerciful distinctness? He heard the sobs of the girl who had said such
a blithe goodbye to the young _Chasseur Alpin_, he saw her going away,
led by her elderly companion, and powdering her nose at the _laiterie_
over the cup of coffee she could not swallow. And this was what her sobs
had meant....

“This place,” said Mr. Brant, with his usual preliminary cough, “must
be??” He bent over a motor-map, trying to decipher the name; but after
fumbling for his eye-glasses, and rubbing them with a beautifully
monogrammed cambric handkerchief, he folded the map up again and slipped
it into one of the many pockets which honeycombed the interior of the
car. Campton recalled the deathlike neatness of the banker’s private
office on the day when the one spot of disorder in it had been the torn
telegram announcing Benny Upsher’s disappearance.

The motor lowered its speed to make way for a long train of army
lorries. Close upon them clattered a file of gun-wagons, with unshaven
soldiers bestriding the gaunt horses. Torpedo-cars carrying officers
slipped cleverly in and out of the tangle, and motor-cycles, incessantly
rushing by, peppered the air with their explosions.

“This is the sort of thing he’s been living in?living in for months and
months,” Campton mused.

He himself had seen something of the same kind when he had gone to
Chalons in the early days to appeal to Fortin-Lescluze; but at that time
the dread significance of the machinery of war had passed almost
unnoticed in his preoccupation about his boy. Now he realized that for a
year that machinery had been the setting of his boy’s life; for months
past such sights and sounds as these had formed the whole of George’s
world; and Campton’s eyes took in every detail with an agonized avidity.

“What’s that?” he exclaimed.

A huge continuous roar, seeming to fall from the low clouds above them,
silenced the puny rumble and clatter of the road. On and on it went, in
a slow pulsating rhythm, like the boom of waves driven by a gale on some
far-distant coast.

“That? The guns??” said Mr. Brant.

“At the front?”

“Oh, sometimes they seem much nearer. Depends on the wind.”

Campton sat bewildered. Had he ever before heard that sinister roar? At
Chalons? He could not be sure. But the sound had assuredly not been the
same; now it overwhelmed him like the crash of the sea over a drowning
head. He cowered back in his corner. Would it ever stop, he asked
himself? Or was it always like this, day and night, in the hell of hells
that they were bound for? Was that merciless thud forever in the ears of
the dying?

A sentinel stopped the motor and asked for their pass. He turned it
about and about, holding it upside-down in his horny hands, and
wrinkling his brows in the effort to decipher the inverted characters.

“How can I tell???” he grumbled doubtfully, looking from the faces of
the two travellers to their unrecognizable photographs.

Mr. Brant was already feeling for his pocket, and furtively extracting a
bank-note.

“For God’s sake?not that!” Campton cried, bringing his hand down on the
banker’s. Leaning over, he spoke to the sentinel. “My son’s dying at the
front. Can’t you see it when you look at me?”

The man looked, and slowly gave back the paper. “You can pass,” he said,
shouldering his rifle.

The motor shot on, and the two men drew back into their corners. Mr.
Brant fidgeted with his eye-glasses, and after an interval coughed
again. “I must thank you,” he began, “for?for saving me just now from an
inexcusable blunder. It was done mechanically ... one gets into the
habit....”

“Quite so,” said Campton drily. “But there are cases??”

“Of course?of course.”

Silence fell once more. Mr. Brant sat bolt upright, his profile detached
against the wintry fields. Campton, sunk into his corner, glanced now
and then at the neat grey silhouette, in which the perpendicular glint
of the eye-glass nearest him was the only point of light. He said to
himself that the man was no doubt suffering horribly; but he was not
conscious of any impulse of compassion. He and Mr. Brant were like two
strangers pinned down together in a railway-smash: the shared agony did
not bring them nearer. On the contrary, Campton, as the hours passed,
felt himself more and more exasperated by the mute anguish at his side.
What right had this man to be suffering as he himself was suffering,
what right to be here with him at all? It was simply in the exercise of
what the banker called his “habit”?the habit of paying, of buying
everything, people and privileges and possessions?that he had acquired
this ghastly claim to share in an agony which was not his.

“I shan’t even have my boy to myself on his deathbed,” the father
thought in desperation; and the mute presence at his side became once
more the symbol of his own failure.

The motor, with frequent halts, continued to crawl slowly on between
lorries, field-kitchens, artillery wagons, companies of haggard infantry
returning to their cantonments, and more and more vanloads of troops
pressing forward; it seemed to Campton that hours elapsed before Mr.
Brant again spoke.

“This must be Amiens,” he said, in a voice even lower than usual.

The father roused himself and looked out. They were passing through the
streets of a town swarming with troops?but he was still barely conscious
of what he looked at. He perceived that he had been half-asleep, and
dreaming of George as a little boy, when he used to have such bad colds.
Campton remembered in particular the day he had found the lad in bed, in
a scarlet sweater, in his luxurious overheated room, reading the first
edition of Lavengro. It was on that day that he and his son had first
really got to know each other; but what was it that had marked the date
to George? The fact that Mr. Brant, learning of his joy in the book, had
instantly presented it to him?with the price-label left inside the
cover.

“And it’ll be worth a lot more than that by the time you’re grown up,”
Mr. Brant had told his stepson; to which George was recorded to have
answered sturdily: “No, it won’t, if I find other stories I like
better.”

Miss Anthony had assisted at the conversation and reported it
triumphantly to Campton; but the painter, who had to save up to give his
boy even a simple present, could see in the incident only one more
attempt to rob him of his rights. “They won’t succeed, though, they
won’t succeed: they don’t know how to go about it, thank the Lord,” he
had said.

But they had succeeded after all; what better proof of it was there than
Mr. Brant’s tacit right to be sitting here beside him to-day; than the
fact that but for Mr. Brant it might have been impossible for Campton to
get to his boy’s side in time?

Oh, that pitiless incessant hammering of the guns! As the travellers
advanced the noise grew louder, fiercer, more unbroken; the
closely-fitted panes of the car rattled and danced like those of an old
omnibus. Sentinels stopped the chauffeur more frequently; Mr. Brant had
to produce the blue paper again and again. The day was wearing
on?Campton began again to be aware of a sick weariness, a growing
remoteness and confusion of mind. Through it he perceived that Mr.
Brant, diving into deeper recesses of upholstery, had brought out a
silver sandwich-box, a flask and glasses. As by magic they stood on a
shiny shelf which slid out of another recess, and Mr. Brant was
proffering the box. “It’s a long way yet; you’ll need all your
strength,” he said.

Campton, who had half turned from the invitation, seized a sandwich and
emptied one of the glasses. Mr. Brant was right; he must not let himself
float away into the void, seductive as its drowsy shimmer was.

His wits returned, and with them a more intolerable sense of reality. He
was all alive now. Every crash of the guns seemed to tear a piece of
flesh from his body; and it was always the piece nearest the heart. The
nurse’s few lines had said: “A shell wound: the right arm fractured,
fear for the lungs.” And one of these awful crashes had done it:
bursting in mystery from that innocent-looking sky, and rushing
inoffensively over hundreds of other young men till it reached its
destined prey, found George, and dug a red grave for him. Campton was
convinced now that his son was dead. It was not only that he had
received the Legion of Honour; it was the appalling all-destroying
thunder of the shells as they went on crashing and bursting. What could
they leave behind them but mismated fragments? Gathering up all his
strength in the effort not to recoil from the vision, Campton saw his
son’s beautiful body like a carcass tumbled out of a butcher’s cart....

                  *       *       *       *       *

“Doullens,” said Mr. Brant.

They were in a town, and the motor had turned into the court of a great
barrack-like building. Before them stood a line of empty stretchers such
as Campton had seen at Chalons. A young doctor in a cotton blouse was
lighting a cigarette and laughing with a nurse?laughing! At regular
intervals the cannonade shook the windows; it seemed the heart-beat of
the place. Campton noticed that many of the window-panes had been
broken, and patched with paper.

Inside they found another official, who called to another nurse as she
passed by laden with fresh towels. She disappeared into a room where
heaps of bloody linen were being stacked into baskets, returned, looked
at Campton and nodded. He looked back at her blunt tired features and
kindly eyes, and said to himself that they had perhaps been his son’s
last sight on earth.

The nurse smiled.

“It’s three flights up,” she said; “he’ll be glad.”

Glad! He was not dead, then; he could even be glad! In the staggering
rush of relief the father turned instinctively to Mr. Brant; he felt
that there was enough joy to be shared. But Mr. Brant, though he must
have heard what the nurse had said, was moving away; he did not seem to
understand.

“This way??” Campton called after him, pointing to the nurse, who was
already on the first step of the stairs.

Mr. Brant looked slightly puzzled; then, as the other’s meaning reached
him, he coloured a little, bent his head stiffly, and waved his stick
toward the door.

“Thanks,” he said, “I think I’ll take a stroll first ... stretch my
legs....” and Campton, with a rush of gratitude, understood that he was
to be left alone with his son.




                                  XXV


He followed his guide up the steep flights, which seemed to become
buoyant and lift him like waves. It was as if the muscle that always
dragged back his lame leg had suddenly regained its elasticity. He
floated up as one mounts stairs in a dream. A smell of disinfectants
hung in the cold air, and once, through a half-open door, a sickening
odour came: he remembered it at Chalons, and Fortin’s murmured:
“Gangrene?ah, if only we could get them sooner!”

How soon had they got _his_ boy, Campton wondered? The letter,
mercifully sent by hand to Paris, had reached him on the third day after
George’s arrival at the Doullens hospital; but he did not yet know how
long before that the shell-splinter had done its work. The nurse did not
know either. How could she remember? They had so many! The administrator
would look up the files and tell him. Only there was no time for that
now.

On a landing Campton heard a babble and scream: a nauseating scream in a
queer bleached voice that might have been man, woman or monkey’s.
Perhaps that was what the French meant by “a white voice”: this voice
which was as featureless as some of the poor men’s obliterated faces!
Campton shot an anguished look at his companion, and she understood and
shook her head. “Oh, no: that’s in the big ward. It’s the way they
scream after a dressing....”

She opened a door, and he was in a room with three beds in it, wooden
pallets hastily knocked together and spread with rough grey blankets. In
spite of the cold, flies still swarmed on the unwashed panes, and there
were big holes in the fly-net over the bed nearest the window. Under the
net lay a middle-aged bearded man, heavily bandaged about the chest and
left arm: he was snoring, his mouth open, his gaunt cheeks drawn in with
the fight for breath. Campton said to himself that if his own boy lived
he should like some day to do something for this poor devil who was his
roommate. Then he looked about him and saw that the two other beds were
empty.

He drew back.

The nurse was bending over the bearded man. “He’ll wake presently?I’ll
leave you”; and she slipped out. Campton looked again at the stranger;
then his glance travelled to the scarred brown hand on the sheet, a hand
with broken nails and blackened finger-tips. It was George’s hand, his
son’s, swollen, disfigured but unmistakable. The father knelt down and
laid his lips on it.

                  *       *       *       *       *

“What was the first thing you felt?” Adele Anthony asked him afterward:
and he answered: “Nothing.”

“Yes?at the very first, I know: it’s always like that. But the first
thing _after_ you began to feel anything?”

He considered, and then said slowly: “The difference.”

“The difference in _him_?”

“In him?in life?in everything.”

Miss Anthony, who understood as a rule, was evidently puzzled. “What
kind of a difference?”

“Oh, a complete difference.” With that she had to be content.

The sense of it had first come to Campton when the bearded man, raising
his lids, looked at him from far off with George’s eyes, and touched
him, very feebly, with George’s hand. It was in the moment of
identifying his son that he felt the son he had known to be lost to him
forever.

George’s lips were moving, and the father laid his ear to them; perhaps
these were last words that his boy was saying.

“Old Dad?in a motor?”

Campton nodded.

The fact seemed faintly to interest George, who continued to examine him
with those distant eyes.

“Uncle Andy’s?”

Campton nodded again.

“Mother???”

“She’s coming too?very soon.”

George’s lips were screwed into a whimsical smile. “I must have a shave
first,” he said, and drowsed off again, his hand in Campton’s....

                  *       *       *       *       *

“The other gentleman??” the nurse questioned the next morning.

Campton had spent the night in the hospital, stretched on the floor at
his son’s threshold. It was a breach of rules, but for once the major
had condoned it. As for Mr. Brant, Campton had forgotten all about him,
and at first did not know what the nurse meant. Then he woke with a
start to the consciousness of his fellow-traveller’s nearness. Mr.
Brant, the nurse explained, had come to the hospital early, and had been
waiting below for the last two hours. Campton, almost as gaunt and
unshorn as his son, pulled himself to his feet and went down. In the
hall the banker, very white, but smooth and trim as ever, was patiently
measuring the muddy flags.

“Less temperature this morning,” Campton called from the last flight.

“Oh,” stammered Mr. Brant, red and pale by turns.

Campton smiled haggardly and pulled himself together in an effort of
communicativeness. “Look here?he’s asked for you; you’d better go up.
Only for a few minutes, please; he’s awfully weak.”

Mr. Brant, speechless, stood stiffly waiting to be conducted. Campton
noticed the mist in his eyes, and took pity on him.

“I say?where’s the hotel? Just a step away? I’ll go around, then, and
get a shave and a wash while you’re with him,” the father said, with a
magnanimity which he somehow felt the powers might take account of in
their subsequent dealings with George. If the boy was to live Campton
could afford to be generous; and he had decided to assume that the boy
would live, and to order his behaviour accordingly.

“I?thank you,” said Mr. Brant, turning toward the stairs.

“Five minutes at the outside!” Campton cautioned him, and hurried out
into the morning air through which the guns still crashed methodically.

When he got back to the hospital, refreshed and decent, he was
surprised, and for a moment alarmed, to find that Mr. Brant had not come
down.

“Sending up his temperature, of course?damn him!” Campton raged,
scrambling up the stairs as fast as his stiff leg permitted. But outside
of George’s door he saw a small figure patiently mounting guard.

“I stayed with him less than five minutes; I was merely waiting to thank
you.”

“Oh, that’s all right.” Campton paused, and then made his supreme
effort. “How does he strike you?”

“Hopefully?hopefully. He had his joke as usual,” Mr. Brant said with a
twitching smile.

“Oh, _that_??! But his temperature’s decidedly lower. Of course they may
have to take the ball out of the lung; but perhaps before they do it he
can be moved from this hell.”

The two men were silent, the same passion of anxiety consuming them, and
no means left of communicating it to each other.

“I’ll look in again later. Shall I have something to eat sent round to
you from the hotel?” Mr. Brant suggested.

“Oh, thanks?if you would.”

Campton put out his hand and crushed Mr. Brant’s dry fingers. But for
this man he might not have got to his son in time; and this man had not
once made use of the fact to press his own claim on George. With pity in
his heart, the father, privileged to remain at his son’s bedside,
watched Mr. Brant’s small figure retreating alone. How ghastly to sit
all day in that squalid hotel, his eyes on his watch, with nothing to do
but to wonder and wonder about the temperature of another man’s son!

                  *       *       *       *       *

The next day was worse; so much worse that everything disappeared from
Campton’s view but the present agony of watching, hovering, hanging
helplessly on the words of nurse and doctor, and spying on the glances
they exchanged behind his back.

There could be no thought yet of extracting the bullet; a great surgeon,
passing through the wards on a hasty tour of inspection, had confirmed
this verdict. Oh, to have kept the surgeon there?to have had him at hand
to watch for the propitious moment and seize it without an instant’s
delay! Suddenly the vision which to Campton had been among the most
hideous of all his crowding nightmares?that of George stretched naked on
an operating-table, his face hidden by a chloroform mask, and an orderly
hurrying away with a pile of red towels like those perpetually carried
through the passages below?this vision became to the father’s fevered
mind as soothing as a glimpse of Paradise. If only George’s temperature
would go down?if only the doctors would pronounce him strong enough to
have the bullet taken out! What would anything else matter then? Campton
would feel as safe as he used to years ago, when after the recurring
months of separation the boy came back from school, and he could take
him in his arms and make sure that he was the same Georgie, only bigger,
browner, with thicker curlier hair, and tougher muscles under his
jacket.

What if the great surgeon, on his way back from the front, were to pass
through the town again that evening, reverse his verdict, and perhaps
even perform the operation then and there? Was there no way of
prevailing on him to stop and take another look at George on the return?
The idea took immediate possession of Campton, crowding out his
intolerable anguish, and bringing such relief that for a few seconds he
felt as if some life-saving operation had been performed on himself. As
he stood watching the great man’s retreat, followed by doctors and
nurses, Mr. Brant suddenly touched his arm, and the eyes of the two met.
Campton understood and gasped out: “Yes, yes; we must manage to get him
back.”

Mr. Brant nodded. “At all costs.” He paused, again interrogated
Campton’s eyes, and stammered: “You authorize???”

“Oh, God?anything!”

“He’s dined at my house in Paris,” Mr. Brant threw in, as if trying to
justify himself.

“Oh, go?_go_!” Campton almost pushed him down the stairs. Ten minutes
later he reappeared, modest but exultant.

“Well?”

“He wouldn’t commit himself, before the others??”

“Oh??”

“But to me, as he was getting into the motor??”

“Well?”

“Yes: if possible. Somewhere about midnight.”

Campton turned away, choking, and stumped off toward the tall window at
the end of the passage. Below him lay the court. A line of stretchers
was being carried across it, not empty this time, but each one with a
bloody burden. Doctors, nurses, orderlies hurried to and fro. Drub,
drub, drub, went the guns, shaking the windows, rolling their fierce din
along the cloudy sky, down the corridors of the hospital and the
pavement of the streets, like huge bowls crashing through story above
story of a kind of sky-scraping bowling alley.

“Even the dead underground must hear them!” Campton muttered.

The word made him shudder superstitiously, and he crept back to George’s
door and opened it; but the nurse, within, shook her head.

“He must sleep after the examination. Better go.”

Campton turned and saw Mr. Brant waiting. A bell rang twelve. The two,
in silence, walked down the stairs, crossed the court (averting their
eyes from the stretchers) and went to the hotel to get something to eat.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Midnight came. It passed. No one in the hurried confused world of the
hospital had heard of the possibility of the surgeon’s returning. When
Campton mentioned it to the nurse she smiled her tired smile, and said:
“He could have done nothing.”

Done nothing! How could she know? How could any one, but the surgeon
himself? Would he have promised if he had not thought there was some
chance? Campton, stretched out on a blanket and his rolled-up coat, lay
through the long restless hours staring at the moonlit sky framed by the
window of the corridor. Great clouds swept over that cold indifferent
vault: they seemed like the smoke from the guns which had not once
ceased through the night. At last he got up, turned his back on the
window, and lay down again facing the stairs. The moonlight unrolled a
white strip along the stone floor. A church-bell rang one ... two ...
there were noises and movements below. Campton raised himself, his heart
beating all over his body. Steps came echoing up.

“Careful!” some one called. A stretcher rounded the stair-rail; another,
and then another. An orderly with a lantern preceded them, followed by
one of the doctors, an old bunched-up man in a muddy uniform, who
stopped furtively to take a pinch of snuff. Campton could not believe
his eyes; didn’t the hospital people know that every bed on that floor
was full? Every bed, that is, but the two in George’s room; and the
nurse had given Campton the hope, the promise almost, that as long as
his boy was so ill she would keep those empty. “I’ll manage somehow,”
she had said.

For a mad moment Campton was on the point of throwing himself in the way
of the tragic procession, barring the threshold with his arms. “What
does this mean?” he stammered to the nurse, who had appeared from
another room with her little lamp.

She gave a shrug. “More casualties?every hospital is like this.”

He stood aside, wrathful, impotent. At least if Brant had been there,
perhaps by some offer of money?but how, to whom? Of what earthly use,
after all, was Brant’s boasted “influence”? These people would only
laugh at him?perhaps put them both out of the hospital!

He turned despairingly to the nurse. “You might as well have left him in
the trenches.”

“Don’t say that, sir,” she answered; and the echo of his own words
horrified him like a sacrilege.

Two of the stretchers were carried into George’s room. Campton caught a
glimpse of George, muttering and tossing; the moonlight lay in the
hollows of his bearded face, and again the father had the sense of utter
alienation from that dark delirious man who for brief intervals suddenly
became his son, and then as suddenly wandered off into strangeness.

The nurse slipped out of the room and signed to him.

“Both nearly gone ... they won’t trouble him long,” she whispered.

The man on the third stretcher was taken to a room at the other end of
the corridor. Campton watched him being lifted in. He was to lie on the
floor, then? For in that room there was certainly no vacancy. But
presently he had the answer. The bearers did not come out empty-handed;
they carried another man whom they laid on the empty stretcher. Lucky,
lucky devil; going, no doubt, to a hospital at the rear! As the
procession reached the stairs the lantern swung above the lucky devil’s
face: his eyes stared ceilingward from black orbits. One arm, swinging
loose, dangled down, the hand stealthily counting the steps as he
descended?and no one troubled, for he was dead.

At dawn Campton, who must have been asleep, started up, again hearing
steps. The surgeon? Oh, if this time it were the surgeon! But only Mr.
Brant detached himself from the shadows accumulated in the long
corridor: Mr. Brant, crumpled and unshorn, with blood-shot eyes, and
gloves on his unconscious hands.

Campton glared at him resentfully.

“Well?how about your surgeon? I don’t see him!” he exclaimed.

Mr. Brant shook his head despondently. “No?I’ve been waiting all night
in the court. I thought if he came back I should be the first to catch
him. But he has just sent his orderly for instruments; he’s not coming.
There’s been terrible fighting??”

Campton saw two tears running down Mr. Brant’s face: they did not move
him.

The banker glanced toward George’s door, full of the question he dared
not put.

Campton answered it. “You want to know how he is? Well, how should he
be, with that bullet in him, and the fever eating him inch by inch, and
two more wounded men in his room? _That’s_ how he is!” Campton almost
shouted.

Mr. Brant was trembling all over.

“Two more men?in his room?” he echoed shrilly.

“Yes?bad cases; dying.” Campton drew a deep breath. “You see there are
times when your money and your influence and your knowing everybody are
no more use than so much sawdust??”

The nurse opened the door and looked out. “You’re talking too loudly,”
she said.

She shut the door, and the two men stood silent, abashed; finally Mr.
Brant turned away. “I’ll go and try again. There must be other surgeons
... other ways ...” he whispered.

“Oh, your surgeons ... oh, your ways!” Campton sneered after him, in the
same whisper.




                                  XXVI


From the room where he sat at the foot of George’s glossy white bed,
Campton, through the open door, could watch the November sun slanting
down a white ward where, in the lane between other white beds, pots of
chrysanthemums stood on white-covered tables.

Through the window his eyes rested incredulously on a court enclosed in
monastic arches of grey stone, with squares of turf bordered by box
hedges, and a fountain playing. Beyond the court sloped the faded
foliage of a park not yet entirely stripped by Channel gales; and on
days without wind, instead of the boom of the guns, the roar of the sea
came faintly over intervening heights and hollows.

Campton’s ears were even more incredulous than his eyes. He was
gradually coming to believe in George’s white room, the ward beyond, the
flowers between the beds, the fountain in the court; but the sound of
the sea still came to him, intolerably but unescapably, as the crash of
guns. When the impression was too overwhelming he would turn away from
the window and cast his glance on the bed; but only to find that the
smooth young face on the pillow had suddenly changed into that of the
haggard bearded stranger on the wooden pallet at Doullens. And Campton
would have to get up, lean over, and catch the twinkle in George’s eyes
before the evil spell was broken.

Few words passed between them. George, after all these days, was still
too weak for much talk; and silence had always been Campton’s escape
from feeling. He never had the need to speak in times of inward stress,
unless it were to vent his anger?as in that hateful scene at Doullens
between himself and Mr. Brant. But he was sure that George always knew
what was passing through his mind; that when the sea boomed their
thoughts flew back together to that other scene, but a few miles and a
few days distant, yet already as far off, as much an affair they were
both rid of, as a nightmare to a wakened sleeper; and that for a moment
the same vision clutched them both, mocking their attempts at
indifference.

Not that the sound, to Campton at any rate, suggested any abstract
conception of war. Looking back afterward at this phase of his life he
perceived that at no time had he thought so little of the war. The noise
of the sea was to him simply the voice of the engine which had so nearly
destroyed his son: that association, deeply embedded in his half-dazed
consciousness, left no room for others.

The general impression of unreality was enhanced by his not having yet
been able to learn the details of George’s wounding. After a week during
which the boy had hung near death, the great surgeon?returning to
Doullens just as Campton had finally ceased to hope for him?had
announced that, though George’s state was still grave, he might be moved
to a hospital at the rear. So one day, miraculously, the perilous
transfer had been made, in one of Mrs. Brant’s own motor-ambulances; and
for a week now George had lain in his white bed, hung over by
white-gowned Sisters, in an atmosphere of sweetness and order which
almost made it seem as if he were a child recovering from illness in his
own nursery, or a red-haired baby sparring with dimpled fists at a new
world.

In truth, Campton found his son as hard to get at as a baby; he looked
at his father with eyes as void of experience, or at least of any means
of conveying it. Campton, at first, could only marvel and wait; and the
isolation in which the two were enclosed by George’s weakness, and by
his father’s inability to learn from others what the boy was not yet
able to tell him, gave a strange remoteness to everything but the things
which count in an infant’s world: food, warmth, sleep. Campton’s nearest
approach to reality was his daily scrutiny of the temperature-chart. He
studied it as he used to study the _communiques_ which he now no longer
even thought of.

Sometimes when George was asleep Campton would sit pondering on the days
at Doullens. There was an exquisite joy in silently building up, on that
foundation of darkness and anguish, the walls of peace that now
surrounded him, a structure so transparent that one could peer through
it at the routed Furies, yet so impenetrable that he sat there in a kind
of god-like aloofness. For one thing he was especially thankful?and that
was the conclusion of his unseemly wrangle with Mr. Brant; thankful
that, almost at once, he had hurried after the banker, caught up with
him, and stammered out, clutching his hand: “I know?I know how you
feel.”

Mr. Brant’s reactions were never rapid, and the events of the preceding
days had called upon faculties that were almost atrophied. He had merely
looked at Campton in mute distress, returned his pressure, and silently
remounted the hospital stairs with him.

Campton hated himself for his ill-temper, but was glad, even at the
time, that no interested motive had prompted his apology. He should have
hated himself even more if he had asked the banker’s pardon because of
Mr. Brant’s “pull,” and the uses to which it might be put; or even if he
had associated his excuses with any past motives of gratitude, such as
the fact that but for Mr. Brant he might never have reached George’s
side. Instead of that, he simply felt that once more his senseless
violence had got the better of him, and he was sorry that he had behaved
like a brute to a man who loved George, and was suffering almost as much
as he was at the thought that George might die....

After that episode, and Campton’s apology, the relations of the two men
became so easy that each gradually came to take the other for granted;
and Mr. Brant, relieved of a perpetual hostile scrutiny, was free to
exercise his ingenuity in planning and managing. It was owing to
him?Campton no longer minded admitting it?that the famous surgeon had
hastened his return to Doullens, that George’s translation to the sweet
monastic building near the sea had been so rapidly effected, and that
the great man, appearing there soon afterward, had extracted the bullet
with his own hand. But for Mr. Brant’s persistence even the leave to
bring one of Mrs. Brant’s motor-ambulances to Doullens would never have
been given; and it might have been fatal to George to make the journey
in a slow and jolting military train. But for Mr. Brant, again, he would
have been sent to a crowded military hospital instead of being brought
to this white heaven of rest. “And all that just because I overtook him
in time to prevent his jumping into his motor and going back to Paris in
order to get out of my way!” Campton, at the thought, lowered his spirit
into new depths of contrition.

                  *       *       *       *       *

George, who had been asleep, opened his eyes and looked at his father.

“Where’s Uncle Andy?”

“Gone to Paris to get your mother.”

“Yes. Of course. He told me??”

George smiled, and withdrew once more into his secret world.

But Campton’s state of mind was less happy. As the time of Julia’s
arrival approached he began to ask himself with increasing apprehension
how she would fit into the situation. Mr. Brant _had_ fitted into
it?perfectly. Campton had actually begun to feel a secret dependence on
him, a fidgety uneasiness since he had left for Paris, sweet though it
was to be alone with George. But Julia?what might she not do and say to
unsettle things, break the spell, agitate and unnerve them all? Campton
did not question her love for her son; but he was not sure what form it
would take in conditions to which she was so unsuited. How could she
ever penetrate into the mystery of peace which enclosed him and his boy?
And if she felt them thus mysteriously shut off would she not dimly
resent her exclusion? If only Adele Anthony had been coming too! Campton
had urged Mr. Brant to bring her; but the banker had failed to obtain a
permit for any one but the boy’s mother. He had even found it difficult
to get his own leave renewed; it was only after a first trip to Paris,
and repeated efforts at the War Office, that he had been allowed to go
to Paris and fetch his wife, who was just arriving from Biarritz.

Well?for the moment, at any rate, Campton had the boy to himself. As he
sat there, trying to picture the gradual resurrection of George’s
pre-war face out of the delicately pencilled white mask on the pillow,
he noted the curious change of planes produced by suffering and
emaciation, and the altered relation of lights and shadows. Materially
speaking, the new George looked like the old one seen in the bowl of a
spoon, and through blue spectacles: peaked, narrow, livid, with
elongated nose and sunken eye-sockets. But these altered proportions
were not what had really changed him. There was something in the curve
of the mouth that fever and emaciation could not account for. In that
new line, and in the look of his eyes?the look travelling slowly outward
through a long blue tunnel, like some mysterious creature rising from
the depths of the sea?that was where the new George lurked, the George
to be watched and lain in wait for, patiently and slowly puzzled out....

He reopened his eyes.

“Adele too?”

Campton had learned to bridge over the spaces between the questions.
“No; not this time. We tried, but it couldn’t be managed. A little
later, I hope??”

“She’s all right?”

“Rather! Blooming.”

“And Boylston?”

“Blooming too.”

George’s lids closed contentedly, like doors shutting him away from the
world.

It was the first time since his operation that he had asked about any of
his friends, or had appeared to think they might come to see him. But
his mind, like his stomach, could receive very little nutriment at a
time; he liked to have one mouthful given to him, and then to lie
ruminating it in the lengthening intervals between his attacks of pain.

Each time he asked for news of any one his father wondered what name
would next come to his lips. Even during his delirium he had mentioned
no one but his parents, Mr. Brant, Adele Anthony and Boylston; yet it
was not possible, Campton thought, that these formed the circumference
of his life, that some contracted fold of memory did not hold a nearer
image, a more secret name.... The father’s heart beat faster, half from
curiosity, half from a kind of shy delicacy, at the thought that at any
moment that name might wake in George and utter itself.

Campton’s thoughts again turned to his wife. With Julia there was never
any knowing. Ten to one she would send the boy’s temperature up. He was
thankful that, owing to the difficulty of getting the news to her, and
then of bringing her back from a frontier department, so many days had
had to elapse.

But when she arrived, nothing, after all, happened as he had expected.
She had put on her nurse’s dress for the journey (he thought it rather
theatrical of her, till he remembered how much easier it was to get
about in any sort of uniform); but there was not a trace of coquetry in
her appearance. As a frame for her haggard unpowdered face the white
coif looked harsh and unbecoming; she reminded him, as she got out of
the motor, of some mortified Jansenist nun from one of Philippe de
Champaigne’s canvases.

Campton led her to George’s door, but left her there; she did not appear
to notice whether or not he was following her. He whispered: “Careful
about his temperature; he’s very weak,” and she bent her profile
silently as she went in.




                                 XXVII


George, that evening, seemed rather better, and his temperature had not
gone up: Campton had to repress a movement of jealousy at Julia’s having
done her son no harm. Her experience as a nurse, disciplining a vague
gift for the sickroom, had developed in her the faculty of self-command:
before the war, if George had met with a dangerous accident, she would
have been more encumbering than helpful.

Campton had to admit the change, but it did not draw them any nearer.
Her manner of loving their son was too different. Nowadays, when he and
Anderson Brant were together, he felt that they were thinking of the
same things in the same way; but Julia’s face, even aged and humanized
by grief, was still a mere mask to him. He could never tell what form
her thoughts about George might be taking.

Mr. Brant, on his wife’s arrival, had judged it discreet to efface
himself. Campton hunted for him in vain in the park, and under the
cloister; he remained invisible till they met at the early dinner which
they shared with the staff. But the meal did not last long, and when it
was over, and nurses and doctors scattered, Mr. Brant again slipped
away, leaving his wife and Campton alone.

Campton glanced after him, surprised. “Why does he go?”

Mrs. Brant pursed her lips, evidently as much surprised by his question
as he by her husband’s withdrawal.

“I suppose he’s going to bed?to be ready for his early start to-morrow.”

“A start?”

She stared. “He’s going back to Paris.”

Campton was genuinely astonished. “Is he? I’m sorry.”

“Oh??” She seemed unprepared for this. “After all, you must see?we can’t
very well ... all three of us ... especially with these nuns....”

“Oh, if it’s only _that_??”

She did not take this up, and one of their usual silences followed.
Campton was thinking that it was all nonsense about the nuns, and
meditating on the advisability of going in pursuit of Mr. Brant to tell
him so. He dreaded the prospect of a long succession of days alone
between George and George’s mother.

Mrs. Brant spoke again. “I was sorry to find that the Sisters have been
kept on here. Are they much with George?”

“The Sisters? I don’t know. The upper nurses are Red Cross, as you saw.
But of course the others are about a good deal. What’s wrong? They seem
to me perfect.”

She hesitated and coloured a little. “I don’t want them to find
out?about the Extreme Unction,” she finally said.

Campton repeated her words blankly. He began to think that anxiety and
fatigue had confused her mind.

She coloured more deeply. “Oh, I forgot?you don’t know. I couldn’t think
of anything but George at first ... and the whole thing is so painful to
me.... Where’s my bag?”

She groped for her reticule, found it in the folds of the cloak she had
kept about her shoulders, and fumbled in it with wrinkled jewelled
fingers.

“Anderson hasn’t spoken to you, then?spoken about Mrs. Talkett?” she
asked suddenly.

“About Mrs. Talkett? Why should he? What on earth has happened?”

“Oh, I wouldn’t see her myself ... I couldn’t ... so he had to. She had
to be thanked, of course ... but it seems to me so dreadful, so very
dreadful ... _our_ boy ... that woman....”

Campton did not press her further. He sat dumbfounded, trying to take in
what she was so obviously trying to communicate, and yet instinctively
resisting the approach of the revelation he foresaw.

“George?_Mrs. Talkett_?” He forced himself to couple the two names,
unnatural as their union seemed.

“I supposed you knew. Isn’t it dreadful? A woman old enough??” She drew
a letter from her bag.

He interrupted her. “Is that letter what you want to show me?”

“Yes. She insisted on Anderson’s keeping it?for you. She said it
belonged to us, I believe.... It seems there was a promise?made the
night before he was mobilised?that if anything happened he would get
word to her.... No thought of _us_!” She began to whimper.

Campton reached out for the letter. Mrs. Talkett?Madge Talkett and
George! That was where the boy had gone then, that last night when his
father, left alone at the Crillon, had been so hurt by his desertion!
That was the name which, in his hours of vigil in the little white room,
Campton had watched for on his son’s lips, the name which, one day,
sooner or later, he would have to hear them pronounce.... How little he
had thought, as he sat studying the mysterious beauty of George’s face,
what a commonplace secret it concealed!

The writing was not George’s, but that of an unlettered French soldier.
Campton, glancing at the signature, recalled it as that of his son’s
orderly, who had been slightly wounded in the same attack as George, and
sent for twenty-four hours to the same hospital at Doullens. He had been
at George’s side when he fell, and with the simple directness often
natural to his class in France he told the tale of his lieutenant’s
wounding, in circumstances which appeared to have given George great
glory in the eyes of his men. They thought the wound mortal; but the
orderly and a stretcher-bearer had managed to get the young man into the
shelter of a little wood. The stretcher-bearer, it turned out, was a
priest. He had at once applied the consecrated oil, and George, still
conscious, had received it “with a beautiful smile”; then the orderly,
thinking all was over, had hurried back to the fighting, and been
wounded. The next day he too had been carried to Doullens; and there,
after many enquiries, he had found his lieutenant in the same hospital,
alive, but too ill to see him.

He had contrived, however, to see the nurse, and had learned from her
that the doctors had not given up hope. With that he had to be content;
but before returning to his base he had hastened to fulfill his
lieutenant’s instructions (given “many months earlier”) by writing to
tell “his lady” that he was severely wounded, but still alive?“which is
a good deal in itself,” the orderly hopefully ended, “not to mention his
receiving the Legion of Honour.”

Campton laid the letter down. There was too much to be taken in all at
once; and, as usual in moments of deep disturbance, he wanted to be
alone, above all wanted to be away from Julia. But Julia held him with
insistent eyes.

“Do you want this?” he asked finally, pushing the letter toward her.

She recoiled. “Want it? A letter written to that woman? No! I should
have returned it at once?but Anderson wouldn’t let me.... Think of her
forcing herself upon me as she did?and making you paint her portrait! I
see it all now. Had you any idea this was going on?”

Campton shook his head, and perceived by her look of relief that what
she had resented above all was the thought of his being in a secret of
George’s from which she herself was excluded.

“Adele didn’t know either,” she said, with evident satisfaction. Campton
remembered that he had been struck by Miss Anthony’s look of sincerity
when he had asked her if she had any idea where George had spent his
last evening, and she had answered negatively. This recollection made
him understand Mrs. Brant’s feeling of relief.

“Perhaps, after all, it’s only a flirtation?a mere sentimental
friendship,” he hazarded.

“A flirtation?” Mrs. Brant’s Mater Dolorosa face suddenly sharpened to
worldly astuteness. “A sentimental friendship? Have you ever heard
George mention her name?or make any sort of allusion to such a
friendship?”

Campton considered. “No. I don’t remember his ever speaking of her.”

“Well, then??” Her eyes had the irritated look he had seen on the
far-off day when he had thrown Beausite’s dinner invitation into the
fire. Once more, they seemed to say, she had taken the measure of his
worldly wisdom.

George’s silence?his care not even to mention that the Talketts were so
much as known to him?certainly made it look as though the matter went
deep with him. Campton, recalling the tone of the Talkett drawing-room
and its familiars, had an even stronger recoil of indignation than
Julia’s; but he was silenced by a dread of tampering with his son’s
privacy, a sense of the sacredness of everything pertaining to that
still-mysterious figure in the white bed upstairs.

Mrs. Brant’s face had clouded again. “It’s all so dreadful?and this
Extreme Unction too! What is it exactly, do you know? A sort of baptism?
Will the Roman Church try to get hold of him on the strength of it?”

Campton remembered with a faint inward amusement that, in spite of her
foreign bringing-up, and all her continental affinities, Julia had
remained as implacably and incuriously Protestant as if all her life she
had heard the Scarlet Woman denounced from Presbyterian pulpits. At
another time it would have amused him to ponder on this one streak in
her of the ancestral iron; but now he wanted only to console her.

“Oh, no?it was just the accident of the priest’s being there. One of our
chaplains would have done the same kind of thing.”

She looked at him mistrustfully. “The same kind of thing? It’s never the
same with them! Whatever they do reaches ahead. I’ve seen such advantage
taken of the wounded when they were too weak to resist ... didn’t know
what they were saying or doing....” Her eyes filled with tears. “A
priest and a woman?I feel as if I’d lost my boy!”

The words went through Campton like a sword, and he sprang to his feet.
“Oh, for God’s sake be quiet?don’t say it! What does anything matter but
that he’s alive?”

“Of course, of course ... I didn’t mean.... But that he should think
only of _her_, and not of us ... that he should have deceived us ...
about everything ... everything....”

“Ah, don’t say that either! Don’t tempt Providence! If he deceived us,
as you call it, we’ve no one but ourselves to blame; you and I,
and?well, and Brant. Didn’t we all do our best to make him deceive
us?with our intriguing and our wire-pulling and our cowardice? How he
despised us for it?yes, thank God, how he despised us from the first! He
didn’t hide the truth from Boylston or Adele, because they were the only
two on a level with him. And _they_ knew why he’d deceived us; they
understood him, they abetted him from the first.” He stopped, checked by
Mrs. Brant’s pale bewildered face, and the eyes imploringly lifted, as
if to ward off unintelligible words.

“Ah, well, all this is no use,” he said; “we’ve got him safe, and it’s
more than we deserve.” He laid his hand on her shoulder. “Go to bed;
you’re dead-beat. Only don’t say things?things that might wake up the
Furies....”

He pocketed the letter and went out in search of Mr. Brant, followed by
her gaze of perplexity.

The latter was smoking a last cigar as he paced up and down the cloister
with upturned coat-collar. Silence lay on the carefully darkened
building, crouching low under an icy sea-fog; at intervals, through the
hush, the waves continued to mimic the booming of the guns.

Campton drew out the orderly’s letter. “I hear you’re leaving to-morrow
early, and I suppose I’d better give this back,” he said.

Mr. Brant had evidently expected him. “Oh, thanks. But Mrs. Talkett says
she has no right to it.”

“No right to it? That’s a queer thing to say.”

“So I thought. I suppose she meant, till you’d seen it. She was
dreadfully upset ... till she saw me she’d supposed he was dead.”

Campton shivered. “She sent this to your house?”

“Yes; the moment she got it. It was waiting there when my?when Julia
arrived.”

“And you went to thank her?”

“Yes.” Mr. Brant hesitated. “Julia disliked to keep the letter. And I
thought it only proper to take it back myself.”

“Certainly. And?what was your impression?”

Mr. Brant hesitated again. He had already, Campton felt, reached the
utmost limit of his power of communicativeness. It was against all his
habits to “commit himself.” Finally he said, in an unsteady voice: “It
was impossible not to feel sorry for her.”

“Did she say?er?anything special? Anything about herself and??”

“No; not a word. She was?well, all broken up, as they say.”

“Poor thing!” Campton murmured.

“Yes?oh, yes!” Mr. Brant held the letter, turning it thoughtfully about.
“It’s a great thing,” he began abruptly, as if the words were beyond his
control, “to have such a beautiful account of the affair. George
himself, of course, would never??”

“No, never.” Campton considered. “You must take it back to her,
naturally. But I should like to have a copy first.”

Mr. Brant put a hand in his pocket. “I supposed you would. And I took
the liberty of making two?oh, privately, of course. I hope you’ll find
my writing fairly legible.” He drew two folded sheets from his
note-case, and offered one to Campton.

“Oh, thank you.” The two men grasped hands through the fog.

Mr. Brant turned to continue his round, and Campton went up to the
whitewashed cell in which he was lodged. Screening his candle to keep
the least light from leaking through the shutters, he re-read the story
of George’s wounding, copied out in the cramped tremulous writing of a
man who never took pen in hand but to sign a daily batch of typed
letters. The “hand-made” copy of a letter by Mr. Brant represented
something like the pious toil expended by a monkish scribe on the page
of a missal; and Campton was moved by the little man’s devotion.

As for the letter, Campton had no sooner begun to re-read it than he
entirely forgot that it was a message of love, addressed at George’s
request to Mrs. Talkett, and saw in it only the record of his son’s
bravery. And for the first time he understood that from the moment of
George’s wounding until now he had never really thought of him in
relation to the war, never thought of his judgment on the war, of all
the unknown emotions, resolves and actions which had drawn him so many
months ago from his safe shelter in the Argonne.

These things Campton, unconsciously, had put out of his mind, or rather
had lost out of his mind, from the moment when he had heard of George’s
wounding. By-and-bye, he knew, the sense of them, and of the questions
they raised, would come back and possess him; but meanwhile, emptied of
all else, he brimmed with the mere fact of George’s bodily presence,
with the physical signs of him, his weakness, his temperature, the pain
in his arm, the oppression on his lung, all the daily insistent details
involved in coaxing him slowly back to life.

The father could bear no more; he put the letter away, as a man might
put away something of which his heart was too full to measure it.
Later?yes; now, all he knew was that his son was alive.

                  *       *       *       *       *

But the hour of Campton’s entering into glory came when, two or three
days later, George asked with a sudden smile: “When I exchanged
regiments I did what you’d always hoped I would, eh, Dad?”

It was the first allusion, on the part of either, to the mystery of
George’s transit from the Argonne to the front. At Doullens he had been
too weak to be questioned, and as he grew stronger, and entered upon the
successive stages of his convalescence, he gave the impression of having
travelled far beyond such matters, and of living his real life in some
inconceivable region from which, with that new smile of his, he
continued to look down unseeingly on his parents. “It’s exactly as if he
were dead,” the father thought. “And if he were, he might go on watching
us with just such a smile.”

And then, one morning as they were taking a few steps on a sunny
terrace, Campton had felt the pressure of the boy’s sound arm, and
caught the old George in his look.

“I ... good Lord ... at any rate I’m glad you felt sure of me,” Campton
could only stammer in reply.

George laughed. “Well?rather!”

There was a long silence full of sea-murmurs, too drowsy and indolent,
for once, to simulate the horror of the guns.

“I?I only wish you’d felt you could trust me about it from the first, as
you did Adele and Boylston,” the father continued.

“But, my dear fellow, I did feel it! I swear I did! Only, you see, there
was mother. I thought it all over, and decided it would be easier for
you both if I said nothing. And, after all, I’m glad now that I
didn’t?that is, if you really do understand.”

“Yes; I understand.”

“That’s jolly.” George’s eyes turned from his and rested with a joyful
gravity on the little round-faced Sister who hurried up to say that he’d
been out long enough. Campton often caught him fixing this look of
serene benevolence on the people who were gradually repeopling his
world, a look which seemed to say that they were new to him, yet dimly
familiar. He was like a traveller returning after incommunicable
adventures to the place where he had lived as a child; and, as happens
with such wanderers, the trivial and insignificant things, the things a
newcomer would not have noticed, seemed often to interest him most of
all.

He said nothing more about himself, but with the look of recovered
humanness which made him more lovable if less remotely beautiful, began
to question his father.

“Boylston wrote that you’d begun to paint again. I’m glad.”

“Oh, I only took it up for a while last spring.”

“Portraits?”

“A few. But I chucked it. I couldn’t stand the atmosphere.”

“What atmosphere?”

“Of people who could want to be painted at such a time. People who
wanted to ‘secure a Campton.’ Oh, and then the dealers?God!”

George seemed unimpressed. “After all, life’s got to go on.”

“Yes?that’s what they say! And the only result is to make me doubt if
_theirs_ has.”

His son laughed, and then threw off: “You did Mrs. Talkett?”

“Yes,” Campton snapped, off his guard.

“She’s a pretty creature,” said George; and at that moment his eyes,
resting again on the little nurse, who was waiting at his door with a
cup of cocoa, lit up with celestial gratitude.

“The _communique’s_ good to-day,” she cried; and he smiled at her
boyishly. The war was beginning to interest him again: Campton was sure
that every moment he could spare from that unimaginable region which his
blue eyes guarded like a sword was spent among his comrades at the
front.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As the day approached for the return to Paris, Campton began to
penetrate more deeply into the meaning of George’s remoteness. He
himself, he discovered, had been all unawares in a far country, a
country guarded by a winged sentry, as the old hymn had it: the region
of silent incessant communion with his son. Just they two: everything
else effaced; not discarded, destroyed, not disregarded even, but
blotted out by a soft silver haze, as the brown slopes and distances
were, on certain days, from the windows of the seaward-gazing hospital.

It was not that Campton had been unconscious of the presence of other
suffering about them. As George grew stronger, and took his first steps
in the wards, he and his father were inevitably brought into contact
with the life of the hospital. George had even found a few friends, and
two or three regimental comrades, among the officers perpetually coming
and going, or enduring the long weeks of agony which led up to the end.
But that was only toward the close of their sojourn, when George was
about to yield his place to others, and be taken to Paris for the
re-education of his shattered arm. And by that time the weeks of
solitary communion had left such an imprint on Campton that, once the
hospital was behind him, and no more than a phase of memory, it became
to him as one of its own sea-mists, in which he and his son might have
been peacefully shut away together from all the rest of the world.




                                 XXVIII


“Preparedness!” cried Boylston in an exultant crow.

His round brown face with its curly crest and peering half-blind eyes
beamed at Campton in the old way across the desk of the Palais Royal
office; and from the corner where she had sunk down on one of the
broken-springed divans, Adele Anthony echoed: “Preparedness!”

It was the first time that Campton had heard the word; but the sense of
it had been in the air ever since he and George had got back to Paris.
He remembered, on the very day of their arrival, noticing something
different in both Boylston and Miss Anthony; and the change had shown
itself in the same way: both seemed more vivid yet more remote. It had
struck Campton in the moment of first meeting them, in the Paris
hospital near the Bois de Boulogne?Fortin-Lescluze’s old Nursing-Home
transformed into a House of Re-education?to which George had been taken.
In the little cell crowded with flowers?almost too many flowers, his
father thought, for the patient’s aching head and tired eyes?Campton,
watching the entrance of the two visitors, the first to be admitted
after Julia and Mr. Brant, had instantly remarked the air they had of
sharing something so secret and important that their joy at seeing
George seemed only the overflow of another deeper joy.

Their look had just such a vividness as George’s own; as their glances
crossed, Campton saw the same light in the eyes of all three. And now, a
few weeks later, the clue to it came to him in Boylston’s new word.
_Preparedness!_ America, it appeared, had caught it up from east to
west, in that sudden incalculable way she had of flinging herself on a
new idea; from a little group of discerning spirits the contagion had
spread like a prairie fire, sweeping away all the other catchwords of
the hour, devouring them in one great blaze of wrath and enthusiasm.
America meant to be prepared! First had come the creation of the
training camp at Plattsburg, for which, after long delays and much
difficulty, permission had been wrung from a reluctant government; then,
as candidates flocked to it, as the whole young manhood of the Eastern
States rose to the call, other camps, rapidly planned, were springing up
at Fort Oglethorpe in Georgia, at Fort Sheridan in Illinois, at The
Presidio in California; for the idea was spreading through the West, and
the torch kindled beside the Atlantic seaboard already flashed its light
on the Pacific.

For hours at a time Campton heard Boylston talking about these training
camps with the young Americans who helped him in his work, or dropped in
to seek his counsel. More than ever, now, he was an authority and an
oracle to these stray youths who were expending their enthusiasm for
France in the humblest of philanthropic drudgery: students of the Beaux
Arts or the University, or young men of leisure discouraged by the
indifference of their country and the dilatoriness of their government,
and fired by the desire to take part in a struggle in which they had
instantly felt their own country to be involved in spite of geographical
distance.

None of these young men had heard Benny Upsher’s imperious call to be
“in it” from the first, no matter how or at what cost. They were of the
kind to wait for a lead?and now Boylston was giving it to them with his
passionate variations on the great theme of Preparedness. George,
meanwhile, lay there in his bed and smiled; and now and then Boylston
brought one or two of the more privileged candidates to see him. One day
Campton found young Louis Dastrey there, worn and haggard after a bad
wound, and preparing to leave for America as instructor in one of the
new camps. That seemed to bring the movement closer than ever, to bring
it into their very lives. The thought flashed through Campton: “When
George is up, we’ll get him sent out too”; and once again a delicious
sense of security crept through him.

George, as yet, was only sitting up for a few hours a day; the wound in
the lung was slow in healing, and his fractured arm in recovering its
flexibility. But in another fortnight he was to leave the hospital and
complete his convalescence at his mother’s.

The thought was bitter to Campton; he had had all kinds of wild plans?of
taking George to the Crillon, or hiring an apartment for him, or even
camping with him at the studio. But George had smiled all this away. He
meant to return to the Avenue Marigny, where he always stayed when he
came to Paris, and where it was natural that his mother should want him
now. Adele Anthony pointed out to Campton how natural it was, one day as
he and she left the Palais Royal together. They were going to lunch at a
near-by restaurant, as they often did on leaving the office, and Campton
had begun to speak of George’s future arrangements. He would be well
enough to leave the hospital in another week, and then no doubt a
staff-job could be obtained for him in Paris?“with Brant’s pull, you
know,” Campton concluded, hardly aware that he had uttered the detested
phrase without even a tinge of irony. But Adele was aware, as he saw by
the faint pucker of her thin lips.

He shrugged her smile away indifferently. “Oh, well?hang it, yes!
Everything’s changed now, isn’t it? After what the boy’s been through I
consider that we’re more than justified in using Brant’s pull in his
favour?or anybody else’s.”

Miss Anthony nodded and unfolded her napkin.

“Well, then,” Campton continued his argument, “as he’s likely to be in
Paris now till the war is over?which means some time next year, they all
say?why shouldn’t I take a jolly apartment somewhere for the two of us?
Those pictures I did last spring brought me in a lot of money, and
there’s no reason??” His face lit up. “Servants, you say? Why, my poor
Mariette may be back from Lille any time now. They tell me there’s sure
to be a big push in the spring. They’re saving up for that all along the
line. Ask Dastrey ... ask....”

“You’d better let George go to his mother,” said Miss Anthony concisely.

“Why?”

“Because it’s natural?it’s human. _You’re_ not always, you know,” she
added with another pucker.

“Not human?”

“I don’t mean that you’re inhuman. But you see things differently.”

“I don’t want to see anything but one; and that’s my own son. How shall
I ever see George if he’s at the Avenue Marigny?”

“He’ll come to you.”

“Yes?when he’s not at Mrs. Talkett’s!”

Miss Anthony frowned. The subject had been touched upon between them
soon after Campton’s return, but Miss Anthony had little light to throw
on it: George had been as mute with her as with every one else, and she
knew Mrs. Talkett but slightly, and seldom saw her. Yet Campton
perceived that she could not hear the young woman named without an
involuntary contraction of her brows.

“I wish I liked her!” she murmured.

“Mrs. Talkett?”

“Yes?I should think better of myself if I did. And it might be useful.
But I can’t?I can’t!”

Campton said within himself: “Oh, women??!”

For his own resentment had died out long ago. He could think of the
affair now as one of hundreds such as happen to young men; he was even
conscious of regarding it, in some unlit secret fold of himself, as a
probable guarantee of George’s wanting to remain in Paris, another
subterranean way of keeping him, should such be needed. Perhaps that was
what Miss Anthony meant by saying that her liking Mrs. Talkett might be
“useful.”

“Why shouldn’t he be with me?” the father persisted. “He and I were
going off together when the war begun. I was defrauded of that?why
shouldn’t I have him now?”

Miss Anthony smiled. “Well, for one thing, because of that very ‘pull’
you were speaking of.”

“Oh, the Brants, the Brants!” Campton glanced impatiently at the
bill-of-fare, grumbled: “_Dejeuner du jour_, I suppose?” and went on:
“Yes; I might have known it?he belongs to them. From the minute we got
back, and I saw them at the station, with their motor waiting, and
everything arranged as only money can arrange it, I knew I’d lost my boy
again.” He stared moodily before him. “And yet if the war hadn’t come I
should have got him back?I almost had.”

His companion still smiled, a little wistfully. She leaned over and laid
her hand on his, under cover of the bill-of-fare. “You did get him back,
John, forever and always, the day he exchanged into the infantry. Isn’t
that enough?”

Campton answered her smile. “You gallant old chap, you!” he said; and
they began to lunch.

                  *       *       *       *       *

George was able to be up now, able to drive out, and to see more people;
and Campton was not surprised, on approaching his door a day or two
later, to hear several voices in animated argument.

The voices (and this did surprise him) were all men’s. In one he
recognized Boylston’s deep round notes; but the answering voice, flat,
toneless and yet eager, puzzled him with a sense of something familiar
but forgotten. He opened the door, and saw, at the tea-tray between
George and Boylston, the smoothly-brushed figure of Roger Talkett.

Campton had not seen Mrs. Talkett’s husband for months, and in the
interval so much had happened that the young man, always somewhat
faintly-drawn, had become as dim as a daguerreotype held at the wrong
angle.

The painter hung back, slightly embarrassed; but Mr. Talkett did not
seem in the least disturbed by his appearance, or by the fact of himself
being where he was. It was evident that, on whatever terms George might
be with his wife, Mr. Talkett was determined to shed on him the same
impartial beam as on all her other visitors.

His eye-glasses glinted blandly up at Campton. “Now I daresay I _am_
subversive,” he began, going on with what he had been saying, but in a
tone intended to include the newcomer. “I don’t say I’m not. We _are_ a
subversive lot at home, all of us?you must have noticed that, haven’t
you, Mr. Campton?”

Boylston emitted a faint growl. “What’s that got to do with it?” he
asked.

Mr. Talkett’s glasses slanted in his direction. “Why?everything!
Resistance to the herd-instinct (to borrow one of my wife’s expressions)
is really innate in me. And the idea of giving in now, of sacrificing my
convictions, just because of all this deafening noise about America’s
danger and America’s duties?well, _no_,” said Mr. Talkett, straightening
his glasses, “Philistinism won’t go down with me, in whatever form it
tries to disguise itself.” Instinctively, he stretched a neat hand
toward the teacups, as if he had been rearranging the furniture at one
of his wife’s parties.

“But?but?but??” Boylston stuttered, red with rage.

George burst into a laugh. He seemed to take a boyish amusement in the
dispute. “Tea, father?” he suggested, reaching across the tray for a
cigarette.

Talkett jerked himself to his feet. “Take my chair, now do, Mr. Campton.
You’ll be more comfortable. Here, let me shake up this cushion for
you??” (“_Cushion!_” Boylston interjected scornfully.) “A light, George?
Now don’t move!?I don’t say, of course, old chap,” Talkett continued, as
he held the match deferentially to George’s cigarette, “that this sort
of talk would be safe?or advisable?just now in public; subversive talk
never is. But when two or three of the Elect are gathered together?well,
your father sees my point, I know. The Hero,” he nodded at George, “has
his job, and the Artist,” with a slant at Campton, “his. In Germany, for
instance, as we’re beginning to find out, the creative minds, the
Intelligentsia (to use another of my wife’s expressions), have been
carefully protected from the beginning, given jobs, vitally important
jobs of course, but where their lives were not exposed. The country
needs them too much in other ways; they would probably be wretched
fighters, and they’re of colossal service in their own line. Whereas in
France and England??” he suddenly seemed to see his chance??“Well, look
here, Mr. Campton, I appeal to you, I appeal to the great creative
Artist: in any country but France and England, would a fellow of
George’s brains have been _allowed_, even at this stage of the war, to
chuck an important staff job, requiring intellect, tact and _savoir
faire_, and try to get himself killed like any unbaked boy?like your
poor cousin Benny Upsher, for instance? Would he?”

“Yes?in America!” shouted Boylston; and Mr. Talkett’s tallowy cheeks
turned pink.

“George knows how I feel about these things,” he stammered.

George still laughed in his remote impartial way, and Boylston asked
with a grin: “Why don’t you get yourself naturalized?a neutral?”

Mr. Talkett’s pinkness deepened. “I have lived too much among Artists??”
he began; and George interrupted gaily: “There’s a lot to be said on
Talkett’s side too. Going, Roger? Well, I shall be able to look in on
you now in a few days. Remember me to Madge. Goodbye.”

Boylston rose also, and Campton remained alone with his son.

“Remember me to Madge!” That was the way in which the modern young man
spoke of his beloved to his beloved’s proprietor. There had not been a
shadow of constraint in George’s tone; and now, glancing at the door
which had closed on Mr. Talkett, he merely said, as if apostrophizing
the latter’s neat back: “Poor devil! He’s torn to pieces with it.”

“With what?” asked Campton, startled.

“Why, with Boylston’s Preparedness. Wanting to do the proper thing?and
never before having had to decide between anything more vital than
straight or turned-down collars. It’s playing the very deuce with him.”

His eyes grew thoughtful. Was he going to pronounce Mrs. Talkett’s
name?at last? But no; he wandered back to her husband. “Poor little ass!
Of course he’ll decide against.” He shrugged his shoulders. “And
Boylston’s just as badly torn in the other direction.”

“Boylston?”

“Yes. Knowing that he wouldn’t be taken himself, on account of his bad
heart and his blind eyes, and wondering if, in spite of his
disabilities, he’s got the right to preach to all these young chaps here
who hang on his words like the gospel. One of them taunted him with it
the other day.”

“The cur!”

“Yes. And ever since, of course, Boylston’s been twice as fierce, and
overworking himself to calm his frenzy. The men who can’t go are all
like that, when they know it’s their proper work. It isn’t everybody’s
billet out there?I’ve learnt that since I’ve had a look at it?but it
would be Boylston’s if he had the health, and he knows it, and that’s
what drives him wild.” George looked at his father with a smile. “You
don’t know how I thank my stars that there weren’t any ‘problems’ for
me, but just a plain job that picked me up by the collar, and dropped me
down where I belonged.” He reached for another cigarette. “Old Adele’s
coming presently. Do you suppose we could rake up some fresh tea?” he
asked.




                                  XXIX


Coming out of the unlit rainy March night, it was agreeable but almost
startling to Campton to enter Mrs. Talkett’s drawing-room. In the
softness of shaded lamplight, against curtains closely drawn, young
women dressed with extravagant elegance chatted with much-decorated
officers in the new “horizon” uniform, with here and there among them an
elderly civilian head, such as Harvey Mayhew’s silvery thatch and the
square rapacious skull of the newly-knighted patriot, Sir Cyril
Jorgenstein.

Campton had gone to Mrs. Talkett’s that afternoon because she had lent
her apartment to “The Friends of French Art,” who were giving a concert
organized by Miss Anthony and Mlle. Davril, with Mme. de Dolmetsch’s
pianist as their leading performer. It would have been ungracious to
deprive the indefatigable group of the lustre they fancied Campton’s
presence would confer; and he was not altogether sorry to be there. He
knew that George had promised Miss Anthony to come; and he wanted to see
his son with Mrs. Talkett.

An abyss seemed to divide this careless throng of people, so obviously
assembled for their own pleasure, the women to show their clothes, the
men to admire them, from the worn preoccupied audiences of the first
war-charity entertainments. The war still raged; wild hopes had given
way to dogged resignation; each day added to the sum of public anguish
and private woe. But the strain had been too long, the tragedy too
awful. The idle and the useless had reached their emotional limit, and
once more they dressed and painted, smiled, gossiped, flirted as though
the long agony were over.

On a sofa stacked with orange-velvet cushions Mme. de Dolmetsch reclined
in a sort of serpent-coil of flexible grey-green hung with strange
amulets. Her eyes, in which fabulous islands seemed to dream, were fixed
on the bushy-haired young man at the piano. Close by, upright and
tight-waisted, sat the Marquise de Tranlay, her mourning veil thrown
back from a helmetlike hat. She had planted herself in a Louis Philippe
armchair, as if appealing to its sturdy frame to protect her from the
anarchy of Mrs. Talkett’s furniture; and beside her was the daughter for
whose sake she had doubtless come?a frowning beauty who, in spite of her
dowdy dress and ugly boots, somehow declared herself as having already
broken away from the maternal tradition.

Mme. de Tranlay’s presence in that drawing-room was characteristic
enough. It meant?how often one heard it nowadays!?that mothers had to
take their daughters wherever there was a chance of their meeting young
men, and that such chances were found only in the few “foreign” houses
where, discreetly, almost clandestinely, entertaining had been resumed.
You had to take them there, Mme. de Tranlay’s look seemed to say,
because they had to be married (the sooner the better in these wild
times, with all the old barriers down), and because the young men were
growing so tragically few, and the competition was so fierce, and
because in such emergencies a French mother, whose first thought is
always for her children, must learn to accept, even to seek,
propinquities from which her inmost soul, and all the ancestral souls
within her, would normally recoil.

Campton remembered her gallant attitude on the day when, under her fresh
crape, she had rebuked Mrs. Brant’s despondency. “But how she hates it
here?how she must loathe sitting next to that woman!” he thought; and
just then he saw her turn toward Mme. de Dolmetsch with a stiff bend
from the waist, and heard her say in her most conciliatory tone: “Your
great friend, the rich American, _chere Madame_, the benefactor of
France?we should so like to thank him, Claire and I, for all he is doing
for our country.”

Beckoned to by Mme. de Dolmetsch, Mr. Mayhew, all pink and silver and
prominent pearl scarf-pin, bowed before the Tranlay ladies, while the
Marquise deeply murmured: “We are grateful?we shall not forget?” and
Mademoiselle de Tranlay, holding him with her rich gaze, added in fluent
English: “Mamma hopes you’ll come to tea on Sunday?with no one but my
uncle the Duc de Montlhery?so that we may thank you better than we can
here.”

“Great women?great women!” Campton mused. He was still watching Mme. de
Tranlay’s dauntless mask when her glance deserted the gratified Mayhew
to seize on a younger figure. It was that of George, who had just
entered. Mme. de Tranlay, with a quick turn, caught Campton’s eye,
greeted him with her trenchant cordiality, and asked, in a voice like
the pounce of talons: “The young officer who has the Legion of
Honour?the one you just nodded to?with reddish hair and his left arm in
a sling? French, I suppose, from his uniform; and yet??? Yes, talking to
Mrs. Talkett. Can you tell me???”

“My son,” said Campton with satisfaction.

The effect was instantaneous, though Mme. de Tranlay kept her radiant
steadiness. “How charming?charming?charming!” And, after a proper
interval: “But, Claire, my child, we’ve not yet spoken to Mrs. Brant,
whom I see over there.” And she steered her daughter swiftly toward
Julia.

Campton’s eyes returned to his son. George was still with Mrs. Talkett,
but they had only had time for a word or two before she was called away
to seat an important dowager. In that moment, however, the father noted
many things. George, as usual nowadays, kept his air of guarded
kindliness, though the blue of his eyes grew deeper; but Mrs. Talkett
seemed bathed in light. It was such a self-revelation that Campton’s
curiosity was lost in the artist’s abstract joy. “If I could have
painted her like that!” he thought, reminded of having caught Mme. de
Dolmetsch transfigured by fear for her lover; but an instant later he
remembered. “Poor little thing!” he murmured. Mrs. Talkett turned her
head, as if his thought had reached her. “Oh, yes?oh, yes; come and let
me tell you all about it,” her eyes entreated him. But Mayhew and Sir
Cyril Jorgenstein were between them.

“George!” Mrs. Brant called; and across the intervening groups Campton
saw his son bowing to the Marquise de Tranlay.

Mme. de Dolmetsch jumped up, her bracelets jangling like a prompter’s
call. “Silence!” she cried. The ladies squeezed into their seats, the
men resigned themselves to door-posts and window-embrasures, and the
pianist attacked Stravinsky....

“Dancing?” Campton heard his hostess answering some one. “N?no: not
_quite_ yet, I think. Though in London, already ... oh, just for the
officers on leave, of course. Poor darlings?why shouldn’t they? But
to-day, you see, it’s for a charity.” Her smile appealed to her hearer
to acknowledge the distinction.

The music was over, and scanning the groups at the tea-tables, Campton
saw Adele and Mlle. Davril squeezed away in the remotest corner of the
room. He took a chair at their table, and Boylston presently blinked his
way to them through the crowd.

They seemed, all four, more like unauthorized intruders on the brilliant
scene than its laborious organizers. The entertainment, escaping from
their control, had speedily reverted to its true purpose of feeding and
amusing a crowd of bored and restless people; and the little group
recognized the fact, and joked over it in their different ways. But
Mlle. Davril was happy at the sale of tickets, which must have been
immense to judge from the crowd (spying about the entrance, she had seen
furious fine ladies turn away ticketless); and Adele Anthony was
exhilarated by the nearness of people she did not know, or wish to know,
but with whose names and private histories she was minutely and
passionately familiar.

“That’s the old Duchesse de Murols with Mrs. Talkett?there, she’s put
her at the Beausite’s table! Well, of all places! Ah, but you’re all too
young to know about Beausite’s early history. And now, of course, it
makes no earthly difference to anybody. But there must be times when
Mme. Beausite remembers, and grins. Now that she’s begun to rouge again
she looks twenty years younger than the Duchess.??Ah,” she broke off,
abruptly signing to Campton.

He followed her glance to a table at which Julia Brant was seating
herself with the Tranlay ladies and George. Mayhew joined them, nobly
deferential, and the elder ladies lent him their intensest attention,
isolating George with the young girl.

“H’m,” Adele murmured, “not such a bad thing! They say the girl will
have half of old Montlhery’s money?he’s her mother’s uncle. And she’s
heaps handsomer than the other?not that _that_ seems to count any more!”

Campton shrugged the subject away. Yes; it would be a good thing if
George could be drawn from what his mother (with a retrospective
pinching of the lips) called his “wretched infatuation.” But the idea
that the boy might be coaxed into a marriage?and a rich marriage?by the
Brants, was even more distasteful to Campton. If he really loved Madge
Talkett better stick to her than let himself be cajoled away for such
reasons.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As the second part of the programme began, Campton and Boylston slipped
out together. Campton was oppressed and disturbed. “It’s queer,” he
said, taking Boylston’s arm to steer him through the dense darkness of
the streets; “all these people who’ve forgotten the war have suddenly
made me remember it.”

Boylston laughed. “Yes, I know.” He seemed preoccupied and
communicative, and the painter fancied he was going to lead the talk, as
usual, to Preparedness and America’s intervention; but after a pause he
said: “You haven’t been much at the office lately??”

“No,” Campton interrupted. “I’ve shirked abominably since George got
back. But now that he’s gone to the Brants’ you’ll see??”

“Oh, I didn’t mean it as a reproach, sir! How could you think it? We’re
running smoothly enough, as far as organization goes. That’s not what
bothers me??”

“You’re bothered?”

Yes; he was?and so, he added, was Miss Anthony. The trouble was, he went
on to explain, that Mr. Mayhew, after months of total indifference
(except when asked to “represent” them on official platforms) had
developed a disquieting interest in “The Friends of French Art.” He had
brought them, in the beginning, a certain amount of money (none of which
came out of his own pocket), and in consequence had been imprudently put
on the Financial Committee, so that he had a voice in the disposal of
funds, though till lately he had never made it heard. But now,
apparently, “Atrocities” were losing their novelty, and he was disposed
to transfer his whole attention to “The Friends of French Art,” with
results which seemed incomprehensibly disturbing to Boylston, until he
let drop the name of Mme. de Dolmetsch. Campton exclaimed at it.

“Well?yes. You must have noticed that she and Mr. Mayhew have been
getting pretty chummy. You see, he’s done such a lot of talking that
people think he’s at least an Oil King; and Mme. de Dolmetsch is
dazzled. But she’s got her musical prodigy to provide for??” and
Boylston outlined the situation which his astuteness had detected while
it developed unperceived under Campton’s dreaming eyes. Mr. Mayhew was
attending all their meetings now, finding fault, criticizing, asking to
have the accounts investigated, though they had always been audited at
regular intervals by expert accountants; and all this zeal originated in
the desire to put Mme. de Dolmetsch in Miss Anthony’s place, on the plea
that her greater social experience, her gift of attracting and
interesting, would bring in immense sums of money?whereas, Boylston
grimly hinted, they already had a large balance in the bank, and it was
with an eye to that balance that Mme. de Dolmetsch was forcing Mayhew to
press her claim.

“You see, sir, Mr. Mayhew never turns out to be as liberal as they
expect when they first hear him talk; and though Mme. de Dolmetsch has
him in her noose she’s not getting what she wants?by a long way. And so
they’ve cooked this up between them?she and Mme. Beausite?without his
actually knowing what they’re after.”

Campton stopped short, releasing Boylston’s arm. “But what you suggest
is abominable,” he exclaimed.

“Yes. I know it.” But the young man’s voice remained steady. “Well, I
wish you’d come to our meetings, now you’re back.”

“I will?I will! But I’m no earthly use on financial questions. You’re
much stronger there.”

He felt Boylston’s grin through the darkness. “Oh, they’ll have me out
too before long.”

“You? Nonsense! What do you mean?”

“I mean that lots of people are beginning to speculate in war
charities?oh, in all sorts of ways. Sometimes I’m sick to the point of
chucking it all. But Miss Anthony keeps me going.”

“Ah, she would!” Campton agreed.

As he walked home his mind was burdened with Boylston’s warning. It was
not merely the affair itself, but all it symbolized, that made his gorge
rise, made him, as Boylston said, sick to the point of wanting to chuck
it all?to chuck everything connected with this hideous world that was
dancing and flirting and money-making on the great red mounds of dead.
He grinned at the thought that he had once believed in the regenerative
power of war?the salutary shock of great moral and social upheavals. Yet
he _had_ believed in it, and never more intensely than at George’s
bedside at Doullens, in that air so cleansed by passion and pain that
mere living seemed a meaningless gesture compared to the chosen
surrender of life. But in the Paris to which he had returned after
barely four months of absence the instinct of self-preservation seemed
to have wiped all meaning from such words. Poor fatuous Mayhew dancing
to Mme. de Dolmetsch’s piping, Jorgenstein sinking under the weight of
his international honours, Mme. de Tranlay intriguing to push her
daughter in such society, and Julia placidly abetting her?Campton hardly
knew from which of these sorry visions he turned with a completer
loathing....

There were still the others, to be sure, the huge obscure majority; out
there in the night, the millions giving their lives for this handful of
trivial puppets, and here in Paris, and everywhere, in every country,
men and women toiling unweariedly to help and heal; but in Mrs.
Talkett’s drawing-room both fighters and toilers seemed to count as
little in relation to the merrymakers as Miss Anthony and Mlle. Davril
in relation to the brilliant people who had crowded their table into the
obscurest corner of the room.




                                  XXX


These thoughts continued to weigh on Campton; to shake them off he
decided, with one of his habitual quick jerks of resolution, to get back
to work. He knew that George would approve, and would perhaps be oftener
with him if he had something interesting on his easel. Sir Cyril
Jorgenstein had suggested that he would like to have his portrait
finished?with the Legion of Honour added to his lapel, no doubt. And
Harvey Mayhew, rosy and embarrassed, had dropped in to hint that, if
Campton could find time to do a charcoal head?oh, just one of those
brilliant sketches of his?of the young musical genius in whose career
their friend Mme. de Dolmetsch was so much interested.... But Campton
had cut them both short. He was not working?he had no plans for the
present. And in truth he had not thought even of attempting a portrait
of George. The impulse had come to him, once, as he sat by the boy’s
bed; but the face was too incomprehensible. He should have to learn and
unlearn too many things first??

At last, one day, it occurred to him to make a study of Mme. Lebel. He
saw _her_ in charcoal: her simple unquestioning anguish had turned her
old face to sculpture. Campton set his canvas on the easel, and started
to shout for her down the stairs; but as he opened the door he found
himself face to face with Mrs. Talkett.

“Oh,” she began at once, in her breathless way, “you’re here? The old
woman downstairs wasn’t sure?and I couldn’t leave all this money with
her, could I?”

“Money? What money?” he echoed.

She was very simply dressed, and a veil, drooping low from her hat-brim,
gave to her over-eager face a shadowy youthful calm.

“I _may_ come in?” she questioned, almost timidly; and as Campton let
her pass she added: “The money from the concert, of course?heaps and
heaps of it! I’d no idea we’d made so much. And I wanted to give it to
you myself.”

She shook a bulging bag out of her immense muff, while Campton continued
to stare at her.

“I didn’t know you went out so early,” he finally stammered, trying to
push a newspaper over the disordered remains of his breakfast.

She lifted interrogative eyebrows. “That means that I’m in the way?”

“No. But why did you bring that money here?”

She looked surprised. “Why not? Aren’t you the head?the real head of the
committee? And wasn’t the concert given in my house?” Her eyes rested on
him with renewed timidity. “Is it?disagreeable to you to see me?” she
asked.

“Disagreeable? My dear child, no.” He paused, increasingly embarrassed.
What did she expect him to say next? To thank her for having sent him
the orderly’s letter? It seemed to him impossible to plunge into the
subject uninvited. Surely it was for her to give him the opening, if she
wished to.

“Well, no!” she broke out. “I’ve never once pretended to you, have I?
The money’s a pretext. I wanted to see you?here, alone, with no one to
disturb us.”

Campton felt a confused stirring of relief and fear. All his old dread
of scenes, commotions, disturbing emergencies?of anything that should
upset his perpetually vibrating balance?was blent with the passionate
desire to hear what his visitor had to say.

“You?it was good of you to think of sending us that letter,” he
faltered.

She frowned in her anxious way and looked away from him. “Afterward I
was afraid you’d be angry.”

“Angry? How could I?” He groped for a word. “Surprised?yes. I knew
nothing ... nothing about you and....”

“Not even that it was I who bought the sketch of him?the one that Leonce
Black sold for you last year?”

The blood rushed to Campton’s face. Suddenly he felt himself trapped and
betrayed. “You?_you_? You’ve got that sketch?” The thought was somehow
intolerable to him.

“Ah, now you _are_ angry,” Mrs. Talkett murmured.

“No, no; but I never imagined??”

“I know. That was what frightened me?your suspecting nothing.” She
glanced about her, dropped to a corner of the divan, and tossed off her
hat with the old familiar gesture. “Oh, can I talk to you?” she pleaded.

Campton nodded.

“I wish you’d light your pipe, then, and sit down too.” He reached for
his pipe, struck a match, and slowly seated himself. “You always smoke a
pipe in the morning, don’t you? _He_ told me that,” she went on; then
she paused again and drew a long anxious breath. “Oh, he’s so changed! I
feel as if I didn’t know him any longer?do _you_?”

Campton looked at her with deepening wonder. This was more surprising
than discovering her to be the possessor of the picture; he had not
expected deep to call unto deep in their talk. “I’m not sure that I do,”
he confessed.

Her fidgeting eyes deepened and grew quieter. “Your saying so makes me
feel less lonely,” she sighed, half to herself. “But has he told you
nothing since he came back?really nothing?”

“Nothing. After all?how could he? I mean, without indiscretion?”

“Indiscretion? Oh??” She shrugged the word away with half a smile, as
though such considerations belonged to a prehistoric order of things.
“Then he hasn’t even told you that he wants me to get a divorce?”

“A divorce?” Campton exclaimed. He sat staring at her as if the weight
of his gaze might pin her down, keep her from fluttering away and
breaking up into luminous splinters. George wanted her to get a
divorce?wanted, therefore, to marry her! His passion went as deep for
her as that?too deep, Campton conjectured, for the poor little ephemeral
creature, who struck him as wriggling on it like a butterfly impaled.

“Please tell me,” he said at length; and suddenly, in short inconsequent
sentences, the confession poured from her.

George, it seemed, during the previous winter in New York, when they had
seen so much of each other, had been deeply attracted, had wanted
“everything,” and at once?and there had been moments of tension and
estrangement, when she had been held back by scruples she confessed she
no longer understood (inherited prejudices, she supposed), and when her
reluctance must have made her appear to be trifling, whereas, really it
was just that she couldn’t ... couldn’t.... So they had gone on for
several months, with the usual emotional ups-and-downs, till he had left
for Europe to join his father; and when they had parted she had given
him the half-promise that if they met abroad during the summer she would
perhaps ... after all....

Then came the war. George had been with her during those few last hours
in Paris, and had dined with her and her husband (had Campton forgiven
her?) the night before he was mobilised. And then, when he was gone, she
had understood that only timidity, vanity, the phantom barriers of old
terrors and traditions, had prevented her being to him all that he
wanted....

She broke off abruptly, put in a few conventional words about an
ill-assorted marriage, and never having been “really understood,” and
then, as if guessing that she was on the wrong tack, jumped up, walked
to the other end of the studio, and turned back to Campton with the
tears running down her ravaged face.

“And now?and now?he says he won’t have me!” she lamented.

“Won’t have you? But you tell me he wants you to be divorced.”

She nodded, wiped away the tears, and in so doing stole an unconscious
glance at the mirror above the divan. Then, seeing that the glance was
detected, she burst into a sort of sobbing laugh. “My nose gets so
dreadfully red when I cry,” she stammered.

Campton took no notice, and she went on: “A divorce? Yes. And unless I
do?unless I agree to marry him?we’re never to be anything but friends.”

“That’s what he says?”

“Yes. Oh, we’ve been all in and out of it a hundred times.”

She pulled out a gold-mesh bag and furtively restored her complexion, as
Mrs. Brant had once done in the same place.

Campton sat still, considering. He had let his pipe go out. Nothing
could have been farther from the revelation he had expected, and his own
perplexity was hardly less great than his visitor’s. Certainly it was
not the way in which young men had behaved in his day?nor, evidently,
had it been George’s before the war.

Finally he made up his mind to put the question: “And Talkett?”

She burst out at once: “Ah, that’s what I say?it’s not so simple!”

“What isn’t?”

“Breaking up?all one’s life.” She paused with a deepening embarrassment.
“Of course Roger has made me utterly miserable?but then I know he really
hasn’t meant to.”

“Have you told George that?”

“Yes. But he says we must first of all be aboveboard. He says he sees
everything differently now. That’s what I mean when I say that I don’t
understand him. He says love’s not the same kind of feeling to him that
it was. There’s something of Meredith’s that he quotes?I wish I could
remember it?something about a mortal lease.”

“Good Lord,” Campton groaned, not so much at the hopelessness of the
case as at the hopelessness of quoting Meredith to her. After a while he
said abruptly: “You must forgive my asking: but things change
sometimes?they change imperceptibly. Do you think he’s as much in love
with you as ever?”

He had been half afraid of offending her: but she appeared to consider
the question impartially, and without a shadow of resentment. “Sometimes
I think more?because in the beginning it wasn’t meant to last. And
now?if he wants to marry me? Oh, I wish I knew what to do!”

Campton continued to ponder. “There’s one more question, since we’re
talking frankly: what does Talkett know of all this?”

She looked frightened. “Oh, nothing, nothing!”

“And you’ve no idea how he would take it?”

She examined the question with tortured eyebrows, and at length, to
Campton’s astonishment, brought out: “Magnificently??”

“He’d be generous, you mean? But it would go hard with him?”

“Oh, dreadfully, dreadfully!” She seemed to need the assurance to
restore her shaken self-approval.

Campton rose with a movement of pity and laid his hand on her shoulder.
“My dear child, if your husband cares for you, give up my son.”

Her face fell, and she drew back. “Oh, but you don’t understand?not in
the least! It’s not possible?it’s not moral??. You know I’m all for the
new morality. First of all, we must be true to self.” She paused, and
then broke out: “You tell me to give him up because you think he’s tired
of me. But he’s not?I know he’s not! It’s his new ideas that you don’t
understand, any more than I do. It’s the war that has changed him. He
says he wants only things that last?that are permanent?things that hold
a man fast. That sometimes he feels as if he were being swept away on a
flood, and were trying to catch at things?at anything?as he’s rushed
along under the waves.... He says he wants quiet, monotony ... to be
sure the same things will happen every day. When we go out together he
sometimes stands for a quarter of an hour and stares at the same
building, or at the Seine under the bridges. But he’s happy, I’m
sure.... I’ve never seen him happier ... only it’s in a way I can’t make
out....”

“Ah, my dear, if it comes to that?I’m not sure that I can. Not sure
enough to help you, I’m afraid.”

She looked at him, disappointed. “You won’t speak to him then?”

“Not unless he speaks to me.”

“Ah, he frightens you?just as he does me!”

She pulled her hat down on her troubled brow, gathered up her furs, and
took another sidelong peep at the glass. Then she turned toward the
door. On the threshold she paused and looked back at Campton. “Don’t you
see,” she cried, “that if I were to give George up he’d get himself sent
straight back to the front?”

Campton’s heart gave an angry leap; for a second he felt the impulse to
strike her, to catch her by the shoulders and bundle her out of the
room. With a great effort he controlled himself and opened the door.

“You don’t understand?you don’t understand!” she called back to him once
again from the landing.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Madge Talkett had asked him to speak to his son: he had refused, and she
had retaliated by planting that poisoned shaft in him. But what had
retaliation to do with it? She had probably spoken the simple truth, and
with the natural desire to enlighten him. If George wanted to marry her,
it must be (since human nature, though it might change its vocabulary,
kept its instincts), it must be that he was very much in love?and in
that case her refusal would in truth go hard with him, and it would be
natural that he should try to get himself sent away from Paris.... From
Paris, yes; but not necessarily to the front. After such wounds and such
honours he had only to choose; a staff-appointment could easily be got.
Or, no doubt, with his two languages, he might, if he preferred, have
himself sent on a military mission to America. With all this propaganda
talk, wasn’t he the very type of officer they wanted for the neutral
countries?

It was Campton’s dearest wish that George should stay where he was; he
knew his peace of mind would vanish the moment his son was out of sight.
But he suspected that George would soon weary of staff-work, or of any
form of soldiering at the rear, and try for the trenches if he left
Paris; whereas, in Paris, Madge Talkett might hold him?as she had meant
his father to see.

The first thing, then, was to make sure of a job at the War Office.

Campton turned and tossed like a sick man on the hard bed of his
problem. To plan, to scheme, to plot and circumvent?nothing was more
hateful to him, there was nothing in which he was less skilled. If only
he dared to consult Adele Anthony! But Adele was still incorrigibly
warlike, and her having been in George’s secret while his parents were
excluded from it left no doubt as to the side on which her influence
would bear. She loved the boy, Campton sometimes thought, even more
passionately than his mother did; but?how did the old song go??she loved
honour, or her queer conception of it, more. Ponder as he would, he
could not picture her, even now, lifting a finger to keep George back.

Campton struggled all the morning with these questions. After lunch he
pocketed Mrs. Talkett’s moneybag and carried it to the Palais Royal,
where he discovered Harvey Mayhew in confabulation with Mme. Beausite,
who still trailed her ineffectual beauty about the office. The painter
thought he detected a faint embarrassment in the glance with which they
both greeted him.

“Hallo, Campton! Looking for our good friend Boylston? He’s off duty
this afternoon, Mme. Beausite tells me; as he is pretty often in these
days, I’ve noticed,” Mr. Mayhew sardonically added. “In fact, the office
has rather been left to run itself lately?eh? Of course our good Miss
Anthony is absorbed with her refugees?gives us but a divided allegiance.
And Boylston?well, young men, young men! Of course it’s been a weary
pull for him. By the way, my dear fellow,” Mr. Mayhew continued, as
Campton appeared about to turn away, “I called at Mrs. Talkett’s just
now to ask for the money from the concert?a good round sum, I hear it
is?and she told me she’d given it to you. Have you brought it with you?
If so, Mme. Beausite here would take charge of it??”

Mme. Beausite turned her great resigned eyes on the painter. “Mr.
Campton knows I’m very careful. I will lock it up till his friend’s
return. Now that Mr. Boylston is so much away I very often have such
responsibilities.”

Campton’s eyes returned her glance; but he did not waver. “Thanks so
much; but as the sum is rather large it seems to me the bank’s the
proper place. Will you please tell Boylston I’ve deposited it?”

Mr. Mayhew’s benevolent pink turned to an angry red. For a moment
Campton thought he was about to say something foolish. But he merely
bent his head stiffly, muttered a vague phrase about “irregular
proceedings,” and returned to his seat by Mme. Beausite’s desk.

As for Campton, his words had decided his course: he would take the
money at once to Bullard and Brant’s and seize the occasion to see the
banker. Mr. Brant was the only person with whom, at this particular
juncture, he cared to talk of George.




                                  XXXI


Mr. Brant’s private office was as glitteringly neat as when Campton had
entered it for the first time, and seen the fatal telegram about Benny
Upsher marring the order of the desk.

Now he crossed the threshold with different feelings. To have Mr. Brant
look up and smile, to shake hands with him, accept one of his cigars,
and sink into one of the blue leather armchairs, seemed to be in the
natural order of things. He felt only the relief of finding himself with
the one person likely to understand.

“About George??” he began.

“Yes?” said Mr. Brant briskly. “It’s curious?I was just thinking of
looking you up. It’s his birthday next Tuesday, you know.”

“Oh??” said the father, slightly put off. He had not come to talk of
birthdays; nor did he need to be reminded of his son’s by Mr. Brant. He
concluded that Mr. Brant would be less easy to get on with in Paris than
at the front.

“And we thought of celebrating the day by a little party?a dinner, with
perhaps the smallest kind of a dance: or just bridge?yes, probably just
bridge,” the banker added tentatively. “Opinions differ as to the
suitability?it’s for his mother to decide. But of course no evening
clothes; and we hoped perhaps to persuade you. Our only object is to
amuse him?to divert his mind from this wretched entanglement.”

It was doubtful if Mr. Brant had ever before made so long a speech,
except perhaps at a board meeting; and then only when he read the annual
report. He turned pink and stared over Campton’s shoulder at the
panelled white wall, on which a false Reynolds hung.

Campton meditated. The blush was the blush of Mr. Brant, but the voice
was the voice of Julia. Still, it was probable that neither husband nor
wife was aware how far matters had gone with Mrs. Talkett.

“George is more involved than you think,” Campton said.

Mr. Brant looked startled.

“In what way?”

“He means to marry her. He insists on her getting a divorce.”

“A divorce? Good gracious,” murmured Mr. Brant. He turned over a jade
paper-cutter, trying its edge absently on his nail. “Does Julia???” he
began at length.

Campton shook his head. “No; I wanted to speak to you first.”

Mr. Brant gave his quick bow. He was evidently gratified, and the
sentiment stimulated his faculties, as it had when he found that Campton
no longer resented his presence at the hospital. His small effaced
features took on a businesslike sharpness, and he readjusted his
eye-glasses and straightened the paper-cutter, which he had put back on
the desk a fraction of an inch out of its habitual place.

“You had this from George?” he asked.

“No; from her. She’s been to see me. _She_ doesn’t want to divorce.
She’s in love with him; in her way, that is; but she’s frightened.”

“And that makes him the more eager?”

“The more determined, at any rate.”

Mr. Brant appeared to seize the distinction. “George can be very
determined.”

“Yes. I think his mother ought to be made to understand that all this
talk about a wretched entanglement isn’t likely to make him any less
so.”

Mr. Brant’s look seemed to say that making Julia understand had proved a
no less onerous task for his maturity than for Campton’s youth.

“If you don’t object?perhaps the matter might, for the present, continue
to be kept between you and me,” he suggested.

“Oh, by all means. What I want,” Campton pursued, “is to get him out of
this business altogether. They wouldn’t be happy?they couldn’t be. She’s
too much like??” He broke off, frightened at what he had been about to
say. “Too much,” he emended, “like the usual fool of a woman that every
boy of George’s age thinks he wants simply because he can’t get her.”

“And you say she came to you for advice?”

“She came to me to persuade him to give up the idea of a divorce.
Apparently she’s ready for anything short of that. It’s a queer
business. She seems sorry for Talkett in a way.”

Mr. Brant marked his sense of the weight of this by a succession of
attentive nods. He put his hands in his pockets, leaned back, and tilted
his dapper toes against the gold-trellised scrap-basket. The attitude
seemed to change the pale panelling of his background into a
glass-and-mahogany Wall Street office.

“Won’t he be satisfied with?er?all the rest, so to speak; since you say
she offers it?”

“No; he won’t. There’s the difficulty. It seems it’s the new view. The
way the young men feel since the war. He wants her for his wife. Nothing
less.”

“Ah, he respects her,” murmured Mr. Brant, impressed; and Campton
reflected that he had no doubt respected Julia.

“And what she wants is to get you to persuade him?to accept less?”

“Well?something of the sort.”

Mr. Brant sat up and dropped his heels to the floor. “Well,
then?_don’t_!” he snapped.

“Don’t???”

“Persuade her, on the contrary, to keep him hoping?to make him think she
means to marry him. Don’t you see?” Mr. Brant exclaimed, almost
impatiently. “Don’t you see that if she turns him down definitely he’ll
be scheming to get away, to get back to the front, the minute his leave
is over? Tell her that?appeal to her on that ground. Make her do it. She
will if she’s in love with him. And we can’t stop him from going
back?not one of us. He’s restless here already?I know that. Always
talking about his men, saying he’s got to get back to them. The only way
is to hold him by this girl. She’s the very influence we need!”

He threw it all out in sharp terse phrases, as a business man might try
to hammer facts about an investment into the bewildered brain of an
unpractical client. Campton felt the blood rising to his forehead, not
so much in anger at Mr. Brant as at the sense of his own inward
complicity.

“There’s no earthly reason why George should ever go back to the front,”
he said.

“None whatever. We can get him any staff-job he chooses. His mother’s
already got the half-promise of a post for him at the War Office. But
you’ll see, you’ll see! We can’t stop him. Did we before? There’s only
this woman who can do it!”

Campton looked over the banker’s head at the reflection of the false
Reynolds in the mirror. That any one should have been fool enough to pay
a big price for such a patent fraud seemed to him as incomprehensible as
his own present obtuseness seemed to the banker.

“You do see, don’t you?” argued Mr. Brant anxiously.

“Oh, I suppose so.” Campton slowly got to his feet. The adroit brushwork
of the forged picture fascinated him, and he went up to look at it more
closely. Mr. Brant pursued him with a gratified glance.

“Ah, you’re admiring my Reynolds. I paid a thumping price for it?but
that’s always my principle. Pay high, but get the best. It’s a better
investment.”

“Just so,” Campton assented dully. Mr. Brant seemed suddenly divided
from him by the whole width of the gulf between that daub on the wall
and a real Reynolds. They had nothing more to say to each other?nothing
whatever. “Well, goodbye.” He held out his hand.

“Think it over?think it over,” Mr. Brant called out after him as he
enfiladed the sumptuous offices, a medalled veteran holding back each
door.

It was not until Campton was back at Montmartre, and throwing off his
coat to get into his old studio clothes, that he felt in his pocket the
weight of the forgotten concert-money. It was too late in the day to
take it back to the bank, even if he had had the energy to retrace his
steps; and he decided to hand the bag over to Boylston, with whom he was
dining that night to meet the elder Dastrey, home on a brief leave from
his ambulance.

                  *       *       *       *       *

“Think it over!” Mr. Brant’s adjuration continued to echo in Campton’s
ears. As if he needed to be told to think it over! Once again the
war-worn world had vanished from his mind, and he saw only George,
himself and George, George and safety, George and peace. They blamed
women who were cowards about their husbands, mistresses who schemed to
protect their lovers! Well?he was as bad as any one of them, if it came
to that. His son had bought his freedom, had once offered his life and
nearly lost it. Brant was right: at all costs they must keep him from
rushing back into that hell.

That Mrs. Talkett should be the means of securing his safety was bitter
enough. This trivial barren creature to be his all?it seemed the parody
of Campton’s own youth! And Julia, after all, had been only a girl when
he had met her, inexperienced and still malleable. A man less absorbed
in his art, less oblivious of the daily material details of life, might
conceivably have made something of her. But this little creature, with
her farrago of false ideas, her vanity, her restlessness, her
undisguised desire to keep George and yet not lose her world, had
probably reached the term of her development, and would trip on through
an eternal infancy of fads and frenzies.

Luckily, as Mr. Brant said, they could use her for the time; use her
better, no doubt, than had she been a more finely tempered instrument.
Campton was still pondering on these things as he set out for the
restaurant where he had agreed to meet Boylston and Dastrey. At the foot
of his own stairs he was surprised to run against Boylston under the
porte-cochere. They gave each other a quick questioning look, as men did
when they encountered each other unexpectedly in those days.

“Anything up? Oh, the money?you’ve come for the money?” Campton
remembered that he had left the bag upstairs.

“The money? Haven’t you heard? Louis Dastrey’s killed,” said Boylston.

They stood side by side in the doorway, while Campton’s darkened mind
struggled anew with the mystery of fate. Almost every day now the same
readjustment had to be gone through: the cowering averted mind dragged
upward and forced to visualize a new gap in the ranks, and summon the
remaining familiar figures to fill it up and blot it out. And to-day
this cruel gymnastic was to be performed for George’s best friend, the
elder Dastrey’s sole stake in life! Only a few days ago the lad had
passed through Paris, just back from America, and in haste to rejoin his
regiment; alive and eager, throbbing with ideas, with courage, mirth and
irony?the very material France needed to rebuild her ruins and beget her
sons! And now, struck down as George had been?not to rise like
George....

Once more the inner voice in Campton questioned distinctly: “Could you
bear it?” and again he answered: “Less than ever!”

Aloud he asked: “Paul?”

“Oh, he went off at once. To break the news to Louis’ mother in the
country.”

“The boy was all Paul had left.”

“Yes.”

“What difference would it have made in the war, if he’d just stayed on
at his job in America?”

Boylston did not answer, and the two stood silent, looking out
unseeingly at the black empty street. There was nothing left to say,
nowadays, when such blows fell; hardly anything left to feel, it
sometimes seemed.

“Well, I suppose we must go and eat something,” the older man said; and
arm in arm they went out into the darkness.

When Campton returned home that night he sat down and, with the help of
several pipes, wrote a note to Mrs. Talkett asking when she would
receive him.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Thereafter he tried to go back to his painting and to continue his daily
visits to the Palais Royal office. But for the time nothing seemed to
succeed with him. He threw aside his study of Mme. Lebel?he hung about
the office, confused and idle, and with the ever clearer sense that
there also things were disintegrating.

George’s birthday party had been given up on account of young Dastrey’s
death. Mrs. Brant evidently thought the postponement unnecessary; since
George’s return she had gone over heart and soul to the “business as
usual” party. But Mr. Brant quietly sided with George; and Campton was
glad to be spared the necessity of celebrating the day in such a
setting.

It was some time since Campton had seen his son; but the fault was not
his son’s. The painter was aware of having voluntarily avoided George.
He said to himself: “As long as I know he’s safe why should I bother
him?” But in reality he did not feel himself to be fit company for any
one, and had even shunned poor Paul Dastrey on the latter’s hurried
passage through Paris, when he had come back from carrying the fatal
news to young Dastrey’s mother.

“What on earth could Paul and I have found to say to each other?”
Campton argued with himself. “For men of our age there’s nothing left to
say nowadays. The only thing I can do is to try to work up one of my old
studies of Louis. That might please him a little?later on.”

But after one or two attempts he pushed away that canvas too.

At length one afternoon George came in. They had not met for over a
week, and as George’s blue uniform detached itself against the blurred
tapestries of the studio, the north light modelling the fresh curves of
his face, the father’s heart gave a leap of pride. His son had never
seemed to him so young and strong and vivid.

George, with a sudden blush, took his hand in a long pressure.

“I say, Dad?Madge has told me. Told me that you know about us and that
you’ve persuaded her to see things as I do. She hadn’t had a chance to
speak to me of your visit till last night.”

Campton felt his colour rising; but though his own part in the business
still embarrassed him he was glad that the barriers were down.

“I didn’t want,” George continued, still flushed and slightly
constrained, “to say anything to you about all this till I could say:
‘Here’s my wife.’ And now she’s promised.”

“She’s promised?”

“Thanks to you, you know. Your visit to her did it. She told me the
whole thing yesterday. How she’d come here in desperation, to ask you to
help her, to have her mind cleared up for her; and how you’d thought it
all over, and then gone to see her, and how wise and perfect you’d been
about it all. Poor child?if you knew the difference it’s made to her!”

They were seated now, the littered table between them. Campton, his
elbows on it, his chin on his hands, looked across at his son, who faced
the light.

“The difference to you too?” he questioned.

George smiled: it was exactly the same detached smile which he used to
shed on the little nurse who brought him his cocoa.

“Of course. Now I can go back without worrying.” He let the words fall
as carelessly as if there were nothing in them to challenge attention.

“Go back?” Campton stared at him with a blank countenance. Had he heard
aright? The noise of a passing lorry suddenly roared in his ears like
the guns of the front.

“Did you say: _go back_?”

George opened his blue eyes wide. “Why, of course; as soon as ever I’m
patched up. You didn’t think???”

“I thought you had the sense to realize that you’ve done your share in
one line, and that your business now is to do it in another.”

The same detached smile again brushed George’s lips. “But if I happen to
have only one line?”

“Nonsense! You know they don’t think that at the War Office.”

“I don’t believe the War Office will shut down if I leave it.”

“What an argument! It sounds like??” Campton, breaking off on a sharp
breath, closed his lids for a second. He had been gazing too steadily
into George’s eyes, and now at last he knew what that mysterious look in
them meant. It was Benny Upsher’s look, of course?inaccessible to
reason, beyond reason, belonging to other spaces, other weights and
measures, over the edge, somehow, of the tangible calculable world....

“A man can’t do more than his duty: you’ve done that,” he growled.

But George insisted with his gentle obstinacy: “You’ll feel differently
about it when America comes in.”

Campton shook his head. “Never about your case.”

“You will?when you see how we all feel. When we’re all in it you
wouldn’t have me looking on, would you? And then there are my men?I’ve
got to get back to my men.”

“But you’ve no right to go now; no business,” his father broke in
violently. “Persuading that poor girl to wreck her life ... and then
leaving her, planting her there with her past ruined, and her future....
George, you can’t!”

George, in his long months of illness, had lost his old ruddiness of
complexion. At his father’s challenge the blood again rose the more
visibly to his still-gaunt cheeks and white forehead: he was evidently
struck.

“You’ll kill her?and kill your mother!” Campton stormed.

“Oh, it’s not for to-morrow. Not for a long time, perhaps. My shoulder’s
still too stiff. I was stupid,” the young man haltingly added, “to put
it as I did. Of course I’ve got to think of Madge now,” he acknowledged,
“as well as mother.”

The blood flowed slowly back to Campton’s heart. “You’ve got to think
of?just the mere common-sense of the thing. That’s all I ask. You’ve
done your turn; you’ve done more. But never mind that. Now it’s
different. You’re barely patched up: you’re of use, immense use, for
staff-work, and you know it. And you’ve asked a woman to tie up her
future to yours?at what cost you know too. It’s as much your duty to
keep away from the front now as it was before?well, I admit it?to go
there. You’ve done just what I should have wanted my son to do, up to
this minute??”

George laid a hand on his a little wistfully. “Then just go on trusting
me.”

“I do?to see that I’m right! If I can’t convince you, ask Boylston?ask
Adele!”

George sat staring down at the table. For the first time since they had
met at Doullens Campton was conscious of reaching his son’s inner mind,
and of influencing it.

“I wonder if you really love her?” he suddenly risked.

The question did not seem to offend George, scarcely to surprise him.
“Of course,” he said simply. “Only?well, everything’s different
nowadays, isn’t it? So many of the old ideas have come to seem such
humbug. That’s what I want to drag her out of?the coils and coils of
stale humbug. They were killing her.”

“Well?take care _you_ don’t,” Campton said, thinking that everything was
different indeed, as he recalled the reasons young men had had for
loving and marrying in his own time.

A faint look of amusement came into George’s eyes. “Kill her? Oh, no.
I’m gradually bringing her to life. But all this is hard to talk
about?yet. By-and-bye you’ll understand; she’ll show you, we’ll show you
together. But at present nothing’s to be said?to any one, please, not
even to mother. Madge thinks this is no time for such things. There, of
course, I don’t agree; but I must be patient. The secrecy, the
under-handedness, are hateful to me; but for her it’s all a part of the
sacred humbug.”

He rose listlessly, as if the discussion had bled all the life out of
him, and took himself away.

When he had gone his father drew a deep breath. Yes?the boy would stay
in Paris; he would almost certainly stay; for the present, at any rate.
And people were still prophesying that in the spring there would be a
big push all along the line; and after that the nightmare might be over.
Campton was glad he had gone to see Madge Talkett. He was glad, above
all, that if the thing had to be done it was over, and that, by Madge’s
wish, no one was to know of what had passed between them. It was a
distinct relief, in spite of what he had suggested to George, not to
have to carry that particular problem to Adele Anthony or Boylston.

A few days later George accepted a staff-appointment in Paris.




                                BOOK IV




                                 XXXII


Heavily the weeks went by.

The world continued to roar on through smoke and flame, and contrasted
with that headlong race was the slow dragging lapse of hours and days to
those who had to wait on events inactively.

When Campton met Paul Dastrey for the first time after the death of the
latter’s nephew, the two men exchanged a long hand-clasp and then sat
silent. As Campton had felt from the first, there was nothing left for
them to say to each other. If young men like Louis Dastrey must continue
to be sacrificed by hundreds of thousands to save their country, for
whom was the country being saved? Was it for the wasp-waisted youths in
sham uniforms who haunted the reawakening hotels and restaurants, in the
frequent intervals between their ambulance trips to safe distances from
the front? Or for the elderly men like Dastrey and Campton, who could
only sit facing each other with the spectre of the lost between them?
Young Dastrey, young Fortin-Lescluze, Rene Davril, Benny Upsher?and how
many hundreds more each day! And not even a child left by most of them,
to carry on the faith they had died for....

“If we’re giving all we care for so that those little worms can reopen
their dance-halls on the ruins, what in God’s name _is_ left?” Campton
questioned.

Dastrey sat looking at the ground, his grey head bent between his hands.
“France,” he said.

“What’s France, with no men left?”

“Well?I suppose, an Idea.”

“Yes. I suppose so.” Campton stood up heavily.

An Idea: they must cling to that. If Dastrey, from the depths of his
destitution, could still feel it and live by it, why did it not help
Campton more? An Idea: that was what France, ever since she had existed,
had always been in the story of civilization; a luminous point about
which striving visions and purposes could rally. And in that sense she
had been as much Campton’s spiritual home as Dastrey’s; to thinkers,
artists, to all creators, she had always been a second country. If
France went, western civilization went with her; and then all they had
believed in and been guided by would perish. That was what George had
felt; it was what had driven him from the Argonne to the Aisne. Campton
felt it too; but dully, through a fog. His son was safe; yes?but too
many other men’s sons were dying. There was no spot where his thoughts
could rest: there were moments when the sight of George, intact and
immaculate?his arm at last out of its sling?rose before his father like
a reproach.

The feeling was senseless; but there it was. Whenever the young man
entered the room Campton saw him attended by the invisible host of his
comrades, the fevered, the maimed and the dying. The Germans had
attacked at Verdun: horrible daily details of the struggle were pouring
in. No one at the rear had really known, except in swift fitful flashes,
about the individual suffering of the first months of the war; now such
information was systematized and distributed everywhere, daily, with a
cold impartial hand. And every night, when one laid one’s old bones on
one’s bed, there were those others, the young in their thousands, lying
down, perhaps never to rise again, in the mud and blood of the trenches.

Even Boylston’s Preparedness was beginning to get on Campton’s nerves.
He tried to picture to himself how he should exult when his country at
last fell into line; but he could realize only what his humiliation
would be if she did not. It was almost a relief, at this time, to have
his mind diverted to the dissensions among “The Friends of French Art,”
where, at a stormy meeting, Harvey Mayhew, as a member of the Finance
Committee, had asked for an accounting of the money taken in at Mrs.
Talkett’s concert. This money, Mr. Mayhew stated, had passed through a
number of hands. It should have been taken over by Mr. Boylston, as
treasurer, at the close of the performance; but he had failed to claim
it?had, in fact, been unfindable when the organizers of the concert
brought their takings to Mrs. Talkett?and the money, knocking about from
hand to hand, had finally been carried by Mrs. Talkett herself to Mr.
Campton. The latter, when asked to entrust it to Mr. Mayhew, had refused
on the ground that he had already deposited it in the bank; but a number
of days later it was known to be still in his possession. All this time
Mr. Boylston, treasurer, and chairman of the Financial Committee,
appeared to think it quite in order that the funds should have been (as
he assumed) deposited in the bank by a member who was not on that
particular committee, and who, in reality, had forgotten that they were
in his possession.

Mr. Mayhew delivered himself of this indictment amid an embarrassed
silence. To Campton it had seemed as if a burst of protest must
instantly clear the air. But after he himself had apologized for his
negligence in not depositing the money, and Boylston had disengaged his
responsibility in a few quiet words, there followed another blank
interval. Then Mr. Mayhew suddenly suggested a complete reorganization
of the work. He had something to criticize in every department. He, who
so seldom showed himself at the office, now presented a list of
omissions and commissions against which one after another of the active
members rose to enter a mild denial. It was clear that some one
belonging to the organization, and who was playing into his hands, had
provided him with a series of cleverly falsified charges against the
whole group of workers.

Presently Campton could stand it no longer, and, jumping up, suddenly
articulate, he flung into his cousin’s face a handful of home-truths
under which he expected that glossy countenance to lose its lustre. But
Mr. Mayhew bore the assault with urbanity. It did not behove him, he
said, to take up the reproaches addressed to him by the most
distinguished member of their committee?the most distinguished, he might
surely say without offence to any of the others (a murmur of assent); it
did not behove him, because one of the few occasions on which a great
artist may be said to be at a disadvantage is when he is trying to
discuss business matters with a man of business. He, Mr. Mayhew, was
only that, nothing more; but he _was_ that, and he had been trained to
answer random abuse by hard facts. In no way did he intend to reflect on
the devoted labours of certain ladies of the committee, nor on their
sympathetic treasurer’s gallant efforts to acquire, amid all his other
pressing interests, the rudiments of business habits; but Miss Anthony
had all along been dividing her time between two widely different
charities, and Mr. Boylston, like his distinguished champion, was first
of all an artist, with the habits of the studio rather than of the
office. In the circumstances??

Campton jumped to his feet again. If he stayed a moment longer he felt
he should knock Mayhew down. He jammed his hat on, shouted out “I
resign,” and limped out of the room.

It was the way in which his encounters with practical difficulties
always ended. The consciousness of his inferiority in argument, the
visionary’s bewilderment when incomprehensible facts are thrust on him
by fluent people, the helpless sense of not knowing what to answer, and
of seeing his dream-world smashed in the rough-and-tumble of shabby
motives?it all gave him the feeling that he was drowning, and must fight
his way to the surface before they had him under.

In the street he stood in a cold sweat of remorse. He knew the charges
of negligence against Miss Anthony and Boylston were trumped up. He knew
there was an answer to be made, and that he was the man to make it; and
his eyes filled with tears of rage and self-pity at his own
incompetence. But then he took heart at the thought of Boylston’s
astuteness and Miss Anthony’s courage. They would not let themselves be
beaten?probably they would fight their battle better without him. He
tried to protect his retreat with such arguments, and when he got back
to the studio he called up Mme. Lebel, and plunged again into his
charcoal study of her head. He did not remember having ever worked with
such supernatural felicity: it was as if _that_ were his victorious
answer to all their lies and intrigues....

But the Mayhew party was victorious too. How it came about a mind like
Campton’s could not grasp. Mr. Mayhew, it appeared, had let fall that a
very large gift of money from the world-renowned philanthropist, Sir
Cyril Jorgenstein (obtained through the good offices of Mmes. de
Dolmetsch and Beausite) was contingent on certain immediate changes in
the organization (“drastic changes” was Mr. Mayhew’s phrase); and
thereupon several hitherto passive members had suddenly found voice to
assert the duty of not losing this gift. After that the way was clear.
Adele Anthony and Boylston were offered ornamental posts which they
declined, and within a week the Palais Royal saw them no more, and Paris
drawing-rooms echoed with the usual rumours of committee wrangles and
dark discoveries.

The episode left Campton with a bitter taste in his soul. It seemed to
him like an ugly little allegory of Germany’s manœuvring the world into
war. The speciousness of Mr. Mayhew’s arguments, the sleight-of-hand by
which he had dislodged the real workers and replaced them by his
satellites, reminded the painter of the neutrals who were beginning to
say that there were two sides to every question, that war was always
cruel, and how about the Russian atrocities in Silesia? As the months
dragged on a breath of lukewarmness had begun to blow through the world,
damping men’s souls, confusing plain issues, casting a doubt on the
worth of everything. People were beginning to ask what one knew, after
all, of the secret motives which had impelled half-a-dozen
self-indulgent old men ensconced in Ministerial offices to plunge the
world in ruin. No one seemed to feel any longer that life is something
more than being alive; apparently the only people not tired of the
thought of death were the young men still pouring out to it in their
thousands.

Still those thousands poured; still the young died; still, wherever
Campton went, he met elderly faces, known and unknown, disfigured by
grief, shrunken with renunciation. And still the months wore on without
result.

One day in crossing the Tuileries he felt the same soft sparkle which,
just about a year earlier, had abruptly stirred the sap in him. Yes?it
was nearly a year since the day when he had noticed the first
horse-chestnut blossoms, and been reminded by Mme. Lebel that he ought
to buy some new shirts; and though to-day the horse-chestnuts were still
leafless they were already misty with buds, and the tall white clouds
above them full-uddered with spring showers. It was spring again, spring
with her deluding promises?her gilding of worn stones and chilly water,
the mystery of her distances, the finish and brilliance of her nearer
strokes. Campton, in spite of himself, drank down the life-giving
draught and felt its murmur in his veins. And just then, across the
width of the gardens he saw, beyond a stretch of turf and clipped
shrubs, two people, also motionless, who seemed to have the same cup at
their lips. He recognized his son and Mrs. Talkett.

Their backs were toward him, and they stood close together, looking with
the same eyes at the same sight: an Apollo touched with flying sunlight.
After a while they walked on again, slowly and close to each other.
George, as they moved, seemed now and then to point out some beauty of
sculpture, or the colour of a lichened urn; and once they turned and
took their fill of the great perspective tapering to the Arch?the Arch
on which Rude’s Mænad-Marseillaise still yelled her battalions on to
death.




                                 XXXIII


Campton finished his charcoal of Mme. Lebel; then he attacked her in
oils. Now that his work at the Palais Royal was ended, painting was once
more his only refuge.

Adele Anthony had returned to her refugees; Boylston, pale and
obstinate, toiled on at Preparedness. But Campton found it impossible to
take up any new form of work; his philanthropic ardour was exhausted. He
could only shut himself up, for long solitary hours, in the empty and
echoing temple of his art.

George emphatically approved of his course: George was as insistent as
Mrs. Brant on the duty of “business as usual.” But on the young man’s
lips the phrase had a different meaning; it seemed the result of that
altered perspective which Campton was conscious of whenever, nowadays,
he tried to see things as his son saw them. George was not indifferent,
he was not callous; but he seemed to feel himself mysteriously set
apart, destined to some other task for which he was passively waiting.
Even the split among “The Friends of French Art” left him, despite of
his admiration for Boylston, curiously unperturbed. He seemed to have
taken the measure of all such ephemeral agitations, and to regard them
with an indulgent pity which was worse than coldness.

“He feels that all we do is so useless,” Campton said to Dastrey; “he’s
like a gardener watching ants rebuild their hill in the middle of a
path, and knowing all the while that hill and path are going to be wiped
out by his pick.”

“Ah, they’re all like that,” Dastrey murmured.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Mme. Lebel came up to the studio every afternoon. The charcoal study had
been only of her head; but for the painting Campton had seated her in
her own horsehair armchair, her smoky lamp beside her, her sewing in her
lap. More than ever he saw in the wise old face something typical of its
race and class: the obstinate French gift, as some one had put it, of
making one more effort after the last effort. The old woman could not
imagine why he wanted to paint her; but when one day he told her it was
for her grandsons, her eyes filled, and she said: “For which one, sir?
For they’re both at Verdun.”

One autumn afternoon he was late in getting back to the studio, where he
knew she was waiting for him. He pushed the door open, and there, in the
beaten-down attitude in which he had once before seen her, she lay
across the table, her cap awry, her hands clutching her sewing, and
George kneeling at her side. The young man’s arm was about her, his head
pressed against her breast; and on the floor lay the letter, the fatal
letter which was always, nowadays, the key to such scenes.

Neither George nor the old woman had heard Campton enter; and for a
moment he stood and watched them. George’s face, so fair and ruddy
against Mme. Lebel’s rusty black, wore a look of boyish compassion which
Campton had never seen on it. Mme. Lebel had sunk into his hold as if it
soothed and hushed her; and Campton said to himself: “These two are
closer to each other than George and I, because they’ve both seen the
horror face to face. He knows what to say to her ever so much better
than he knows what to say to his mother or me.”

But apparently there was no need to say much. George continued to kneel
in silence; presently he bent and kissed the old woman’s cheek; then he
got to his feet and saw his father.

“The _Chasseur Alpin_,” he merely said, picking up the letter and
handing it to Campton. “It was the grandson she counted on most.”

Mme. Lebel caught sight of Campton, smoothed herself and stood up also.

“I had found him a wife?a strong healthy girl with a good _dot_. There
go my last great-grandchildren! For the other will be killed too. I
don’t understand any more, do you?” She made an automatic attempt to
straighten the things on the table, but her hands beat the air and
George had to lead her downstairs.

It was that day that Campton said to himself: “We shan’t keep him in
Paris much longer.” But the heavy weeks of spring and summer passed, the
inconclusive conflict at the front went on with its daily toll of dead,
and George still stuck to his job. Campton, during this time, continued
to avoid the Brants as much as possible. His wife’s conversation was
intolerable to him; her obtuse optimism, now that she had got her son
back, was even harder to bear than the guiltily averted glance of Mr.
Brant, between whom and Campton their last talk had hung a lasting
shadow of complicity.

But most of all Campton dreaded to meet the Talketts; the wife with her
flushed cheek-bones and fixed eyes, the husband still affably and
continuously arguing against Philistinism. One afternoon the painter
stumbled on them, taking tea with George in Boylston’s little flat; but
he went away again, unable to bear the interminable discussion between
Talkett and Boylston, and the pacifist’s reiterated phrase: “To borrow
one of my wife’s expressions”?while George, with a closed brooding face,
sat silent, laughing drily now and then. What a different George from
the one his father had found, in silence also, kneeling beside Mme.
Lebel!

Once again Campton was vouchsafed a glimpse of that secret George. He
had walked back with his son after the funeral mass for young Lebel; and
in the porter’s lodge of the Avenue Marigny they found a soldier
waiting?a young square-built fellow, with a shock of straw-coloured hair
above his sunburnt rural face. Campton was turning from the door when
George dashed past him, caught the young man by both shoulders, and
shouted out his name. It was that of the orderly who had carried him out
of the firing-line and hunted him up the next day in the Doullens
hospital. Campton saw the look the two exchanged: it lasted only for the
taking of a breath; a moment later officer and soldier were laughing
like boys, and the orderly was being drawn forth to shake hands with
Campton. But again the glance was an illumination; it came straight from
that far country, the Benny Upsher country, which Campton so feared to
see in his son’s eyes.

The orderly had been visiting his family, fugitives from the invaded
regions who had taken shelter in one of Adele Anthony’s suburban
colonies. He had obtained permission to stop in Paris on his way back to
the front; and for two joyful days he was lodged and feasted in the
Avenue Marigny. Boylston provided him with an evening at Montmartre,
George and Mrs. Brant took him to the theatre and the cinema, and on the
last day of his leave Adele Anthony invited him to tea with Campton, Mr.
Brant and Boylston. Mr. Brant, as they left this entertainment, hung
back on the stairs to say in a whisper to Campton: “The family are
provided for?amply. I’ve asked George to mention the fact to the young
man; but not until just as he’s starting.”

Campton nodded. For George’s sake he was glad; yet he could not repress
a twinge of his dormant jealousy. Was it always to be Brant who thought
first of the things to make George happy?always Brant who would alone
have the power to carry them out?

“But he can’t prevent that poor fellow’s getting killed to-morrow,”
Campton thought almost savagely, as the young soldier beamed forth from
the taxi in which George was hurrying him to the station.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It was not many days afterward that George looked in at the studio early
one morning. Campton, over his breakfast, had been reading the
_communique_. There was heavy news from Verdun; from east to west the
air was dark with calamity; but George’s face had the look it had worn
when he greeted his orderly.

“Dad, I’m off,” he said; and sitting down at the table, he
unceremoniously poured himself some coffee into his father’s empty cup.

“The battalion’s been ordered back. I leave to-night. Let’s lunch
together somewhere presently, shall we?”

His eye was clear, his smile confident: a great weight seemed to have
fallen from him, and he looked like the little boy sitting up in bed
with his Lavengro. “After ten months of Paris??” he added, stretching
his arms over his head with a great yawn.

“Yes?the routine??” stammered Campton, not knowing what he said. Yet he
was glad too; yes, in his heart of hearts he knew he was glad; though,
as always happened, his emotion took him by the throat and silenced him.
But it did not matter, for George was talking.

“I shall have leave a good deal oftener nowadays,” he said with
animation. “And everything is ever so much better organized?letters and
all that. I shan’t seem so awfully far away. You’ll see.”

Campton still gazed at him, struggling for expression. Their hands met.
Campton said?or imagined he said: “I see?I do see, already??” though
afterward he was not even sure that he had spoken.

What he saw, with an almost blinding distinctness, was the extent to
which his own feeling, during the long months, had imperceptibly
changed, and how his inmost impulse, now that the blow had fallen, was
not of resistance to it, but of acquiescence, since it made him once
more one with his son.

He would have liked to tell that to George; but speech was impossible.
And perhaps, after all, it didn’t matter; it didn’t matter, because
George understood. Their hand-clasp had made that clear, and an hour or
two later they were lunching together almost gaily.

Boylston joined them, and the three went on together to say goodbye to
Adele Anthony. Adele, for once, was unprepared: it was almost a relief
to Campton, who had winced in advance at the thought of her warlike
attitude. The poor thing was far from warlike: her pale eyes clung to
George’s in a frightened stare, while her lips, a little stiffly,
repeated the stock phrases of good cheer. “Such a relief.... I
congratulate you ... getting out of all this _paperasserie_ and red
tape.... If I’d been you I couldn’t have stood Paris another minute....
The only hopeful people left are at the front....” It was the formula
that sped every departing soldier.

The day wore on. To Campton its hours seemed as interminable yet as
rapid as those before his son’s first departure, nearly two years
earlier. George had begged his father to come in the evening to the
Avenue Marigny, where he was dining with the Brants. It was easier for
Campton nowadays to fall in with such requests: during the months of
George’s sojourn in Paris a good many angles had had their edges rubbed
off.

Besides, at that moment he would have done anything for his son?his son
again at last! In their hand-clasp that morning the old George had come
back to him, simple, boyish, just as he used to be; and Campton’s dread
of the future was lightened by a great glow of pride.

In the Avenue Marigny dining-room the Brants and George were still
sitting together about the delicate silver and porcelain. There were no
flowers: Julia, always correct, had long since banished them as a
superfluity. But there was champagne for George’s farewell, and a
glimpse of rich fare being removed.

Mr. Brant rose to greet Campton. His concise features were drawn with
anxiety, and with the effort to hide it; but his wife appeared to
Campton curiously unperturbed, and the leave-taking was less painful and
uselessly drawn out than he had expected.

George and his father were to be sent to the station in Mr. Brant’s
motor. Campton, as he got in, remembered with a shiver the grey morning,
before daylight, when the same motor had stood at the studio door,
waiting to carry him to Doullens; between himself and his son he seemed
to see Mr. Brant’s small suffering profile.

To shake off the memory he said: “Your mother’s in wonderfully good
form. I was glad to see she wasn’t nervous.”

George laughed. “No. Madge met her this morning at the new
_clairvoyante’s_.?It does them all a lot of good,” he added, with his
all-embracing tolerance.

Campton shivered again. That universal smiling comprehension of George’s
always made him seem remoter than ever. “It makes him seem so old?a
thousand years older than I am.” But he forced an acquiescent laugh, and
presently George went on: “About Madge?you’ll be awfully good to her,
won’t you, if I get smashed?”

“My dear boy!”

There was another pause, and then Campton risked a question. “Just how
do things stand? I know so little, after all.”

For a moment George seemed to hesitate: his thick fair eyebrows were
drawn into a puzzled frown. “I know?I’ve never explained it to you
properly. I’ve tried to; but I was never sure that I could make you
see.” He paused and added quietly: “I know now that she’ll never divorce
Talkett.”

“You know???” Campton exclaimed with a great surge of relief.

“She thinks she will; but I see that the idea still frightens her. And
I’ve kept on using the divorce argument only as a pretext.”

The words thrust Campton back into new depths of perplexity. “A
pretext?” he echoed.

“My dear old Dad?don’t you guess? She’s come to care for me awfully; if
we’d gone all the lengths she wanted, and then I’d got killed, there
would have been nothing on earth left for her. I hadn’t the right, don’t
you see? We chaps haven’t any futures to dispose of till this job we’re
in is finished. Of course, if I come back, and she can make up her mind
to break with everything she’s used to, we shall marry; but if things go
wrong I’d rather leave her as she is, safe in her little old rut. So
many people can’t live out of one?and she’s one of them, poor child,
though she’s so positive she isn’t.”

Campton sat chilled and speechless as the motor whirled them on through
the hushed streets. It paralyzed his faculties to think that in a moment
more they would be at the station.

“It’s awfully fine: your idea,” he stammered at length.
“Awfully?magnanimous.” But he still felt the chill down his spine.

“Oh, it’s only that things look to us so different?so indescribably
different?and always will, I suppose, even after this business is over.
We seem to be sealed to it for life.”

“Poor girl?poor girl!” Campton thought within himself. Aloud he said:
“My dear chap, of course you can count on my being?my doing??”

“Of course, of course, old Dad.”

They were at the station. Father and son got out and walked toward the
train. Campton put both hands on George’s shoulders.

“Look here,” George broke out, “there’s one thing more. I want to tell
you that I know what a lot I owe to you and Adele. You’ve both been
awfully fine: did you know it? You two first made me feel a lot of
things I hadn’t felt before. And you know this _is_ my job; I’ve never
been surer of it than at this minute.”

They clasped hands in silence, each looking his fill of the other; then
the crowd closed in, George exclaimed: “My kit-bag!” and somehow, in the
confusion, the parting was over, and Campton, straining blurred eyes,
saw his son’s smile?the smile of the light-hearted lad of old days?flash
out at him from the moving train. For an instant the father had the
illusion that it was the goodbye look of the boy George, going back to
school after the holidays.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Campton, as he came out of the station, stumbled, to his surprise, on
Mr. Brant. The little man, as they met, flushed and paled, and sought
the customary support from his eye-glasses.

“I followed you in the other motor,” he said, looking away.

“Oh, I say??” Campton murmured; then, with an effort: “Shouldn’t you
like me to drive back with you?”

Mr. Brant shook his head. “Thank you. Thank you very much. But it’s late
and you’ll want to be getting home. I’ll be glad if you’ll use my car.”
Together they strolled slowly across the station court to the place
where the private motors waited; but there Campton held out his hand.

“Much obliged; I think I’ll walk.”

Mr. Brant nodded; then he said abruptly: “This _clairvoyante_ business:
is there anything in it, do you think? You saw how calm?er?Julia was
just now: she wished me to tell you that that Spanish woman she goes
to?her name is Olida, I think?had absolutely reassured her about ...
about the future. The woman says she knows that George will come back
soon, and never be sent to the front again. Those were the exact words,
I believe. _Never be sent to the front again._ Julia put every kind of
question, and couldn’t trip her up; she wanted me to tell you so. It
does sound...? Well, at any rate, it’s a help to the mothers.”




                                 XXXIV


The next morning Campton said to himself: “I can catch that goodbye look
if I get it down at once??” and pulled out a canvas before Mme. Lebel
came in with his coffee.

As sometimes happened to him, the violent emotions of the last
twenty-four hours had almost immediately been clarified and transmuted
into vision. He felt that he could think contentedly of George if he
could sit down at once and paint him.

The picture grew under his feverish fingers?feverish, yet how firm! He
always wondered anew at the way in which, at such hours, the inner flame
and smoke issued in a clear guiding radiance. He saw?he saw; and the
mere act of his seeing seemed to hold George safe in some pure
impenetrable medium. His boy was there, sitting to him, the old George
he knew and understood, essentially, vividly face to face with him.

He was interrupted by a ring. Mme. Lebel, tray in hand, opened the door,
and a swathed and voluminous figure, sweeping in on a wave of musk,
blotted her out. Campton, exasperated at the interruption, turned to
face Mme. Olida.

So remote were his thoughts that he would hardly have recognized her had
she not breathed, on the old familiar guttural: “Juanito!”

He was less surprised at her intrusion than annoyed at being torn from
his picture. “Didn’t you see a sign on the door? ‘No admission before
twelve’??” he growled.

“Oh, yes,” she said; “that’s how I knew you were in.”

“But I’m _not_ in; I’m working. I can’t allow??”

Her large bosom rose. “I know, my heart! I remember how stern you always
were. ‘Work?work?my work!’ It was always that, even in the first days.
But I come to you on my knees: Juanito, imagine me there!” She sketched
a plunging motion of her vast body, arrested it in time by supporting
herself on the table, and threw back her head entreatingly, so that
Campton caught a glint of the pearls in a crevasse of her quaking
throat. He saw that her eyes were red with weeping.

“What can I do? You’re in trouble?”

“Oh, such trouble, my heart?such trouble!” She leaned to him, absorbing
his hands in her plump muscular grasp. “I must have news of my son; I
must! The young man?you saw him that day you came with your wife? Yes?he
looked in at the door: beautiful as a god, was he not? That was my son
Pepito!” And with a deep breath of pride and anguish she unburdened
herself of her tale.

Two or three years after her parting with Campton she had married a
clever French barber from the Pyrenees. He had brought her to France,
and they had opened a “Beauty Shop” at Biarritz and had prospered.
Pepito was born there and soon afterward, alas, her clever husband,
declaring that he “hated grease in cooking or in woman” (“and after my
Pepito’s birth I became as you now see me”), had gone off with the
manicure and all their savings. Mme. Olida had had a struggle to bring
up her boy; but she had kept on with the Beauty Shop, had made a success
of it, and not long before the war had added fortune-telling to massage
and hair-dressing.

“And my son, Juanito; was not my son an advertisement for a Beauty Shop,
I ask you? Before he was out of petticoats he brought me customers;
before he was sixteen all the ladies who came to me were quarrelling
over him. Ah, there were moments when he crucified me ... but lately he
had grown more reasonable, had begun to see where his true interests
lay, and we had become friends again, friends and business partners.
When the war broke out I came to Paris; I knew that all the mothers
would want news of their sons. I have made a great deal of money; and I
have had wonderful results?wonderful! I could give you instances?names
that you know?where I have foretold everything! Oh, I have the gift, my
heart, I have it!”

She pressed his hands with a smile of triumph; then her face clouded
again.

“But six months ago my darling was called to his regiment?and for three
months now I’ve had no news of him, none, none!” she sobbed, the tears
making dark streaks through her purplish powder.

The upshot of it was that she had heard that Campton was “all-powerful”;
that he knew Ministers and Generals, knew great financiers like
Jorgenstein (who were so much more powerful than either Generals or
Ministers), and could, if he chose, help her to trace her boy, who, from
the day of his departure for the front, had vanished as utterly as if
the earth had swallowed him.

“Not a word, not a sign?to me, his mother, who have slaved and slaved
for him, who have made a fortune for him!”

Campton looked at her, marvelling. “But your gift as you call it ...
your powers ... you can’t use them for yourself?”

She returned his look with a tearful simplicity: she hardly seemed to
comprehend what he was saying. “But my son! I want _news_ of my son,
real news; I want a letter; I want to see some one who has seen him! To
touch a hand that has touched him! Oh, don’t you understand?”

“Yes, I understand,” he said; and she took up her desperate litany,
clinging about him with soft palms like medusa-lips, till by dint of
many promises he managed to detach himself and steer her gently to the
door.

On the threshold she turned to him once more. “And your own son,
Juanito?I know he’s at the front again. His mother came the other
day?she often comes. And I can promise you things if you’ll help me. No,
even if you don’t help me?for the old days’ sake, I will! I know secrets
... magical secrets that will protect him. There’s a Moorish salve,
infallible against bullets ... handed down from King Solomon ... I can
get it....”

Campton, guiding her across the sill, led her out and bolted the door on
her; then he went back to his easel and stood gazing at the sketch of
George. But the spell was broken: the old George was no longer there.
The war had sucked him back into its awful whirlpool?once more he was
that dark enigma, a son at the front....

                  *       *       *       *       *

In the heavy weeks which followed, a guarded allusion of Campton’s
showed him one day that Boylston was aware of there being “something
between” George and Madge Talkett.

“Not that he’s ever said anything?or even encouraged me to guess
anything. But she’s got a talking face, poor little thing; and not much
gift of restraint. And I suppose it’s fairly obvious to everybody?except
perhaps to Talkett?that she’s pretty hard hit.”

“Yes. And George?”

Boylston’s round face became remote and mysterious. “We don’t really
know?do we, sir??exactly how any of them feel? Any more than if they
were??” He drew up sharply on the word, but Campton faced it.

“Dead?”

“Transfigured, say; no, trans??what’s the word in the theology books? A
new substance ... somehow....”

“Ah, you feel that too?” the father exclaimed.

“Yes. They don’t know it themselves, though?how far they are from us. At
least I don’t think they do.”

Campton nodded. “But George, in the beginning, was?frankly indifferent
to the war, wasn’t he?”

“Yes; intellectually he was. But he told me that when he saw the first
men on their way back from the front?with the first mud on them?he knew
he belonged where they’d come from. I tried hard to persuade him when he
was here that his real job was on a military mission to America?and it
_was_. Think what he might have done out there! But it was no use. His
orderly’s visit did the trick. It’s the thought of their men that pulls
them all back. Look at Louis Dastrey?they couldn’t keep him in America.
There’s something in all their eyes: I don’t know what. _Dulce et
decorum_, perhaps??”

“Yes.”

There was a pause before Campton questioned: “And Talkett?”

“Poor little ass?I don’t know. He’s here arguing with me nearly every
day. She looks over his shoulder, and just shrugs at me with her
eyebrows.”

“Can you guess what she thinks of George’s attitude?”

“Oh, something different every day. I don’t believe she’s ever really
understood. But then she loves him, and nothing else counts.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Brant continued to face life with apparent serenity. She had
returned several times to Mme. Olida’s, and had always brought away the
same reassuring formula: she thought it striking, and so did her
friends, that the _clairvoyante’s_ prediction never varied.

There was reason to believe that George’s regiment had been sent to
Verdun, and from Verdun the news was growing daily more hopeful. This
seemed to Mrs. Brant a remarkable confirmation of Olida’s prophecy.
Apparently it did not occur to her that, in the matter of human life,
victories may be as ruinous as defeats; and she triumphed in the fact?it
had grown to be a fact to her?that her boy was at Verdun, when he might
have been in the Somme, where things, though stagnant, were on the whole
going less well. Mothers prayed for “a quiet sector”?and then, she
argued, what happened? The men grew careless, the officers were oftener
away; your son was ordered out to see to the repairs of a barbed wire
entanglement, and a sharpshooter picked him off while you were sitting
reading one of his letters, and thinking: “Thank God he’s out of the
fighting.” And besides, Olida was _sure_, and all her predictions had
been so wonderful....

Campton began to dread his wife’s discovering Mme. Olida’s fears for her
own son. Every endeavour to get news of Pepito had been fruitless;
finally Campton and Boylston concluded that the young man must be a
prisoner. The painter had a second visit from Mme. Olida, in the course
of which he besought her (without naming Julia) to be careful not to
betray her private anxiety to the poor women who came to her for
consolation; and she fixed her tortured velvet eyes on him
reproachfully.

“How could you think it of me, Juanito? The money I earn is for my boy!
That gives me the strength to invent a new lie every morning.”

He took her fraudulent hand and kissed it.

The next afternoon he met Mrs. Brant walking down the Champs Elysees
with her light girlish step. She lifted a radiant face to his. “A letter
from George this morning! And, do you know, Olida prophesied it? I was
there again yesterday; and she told me that he would soon be back, and
that at that very moment she could see him writing to me. You’ll admit
it’s extraordinary? So many mothers depend on her?I couldn’t live
without her. And her messages from her own son are so beautiful??”

“From her own son?”

“Yes: didn’t I tell you? He says such perfect things to her. And she
confessed to me, poor woman, that before the war he hadn’t always been
kind: he used to take her money, and behave badly. But now every day he
sends her a thought-message?such beautiful things! She says she wouldn’t
have the courage to keep us all up if it weren’t for the way that she’s
kept up by her boy. And now,” Julia added gaily, “I’m going to order the
cakes for my bridge-tea this afternoon. You know I promised Georgie I
wouldn’t give up my bridge-teas.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Now and then Campton returned to his latest portrait of his son; but in
spite of George’s frequent letters, in spite of the sudden drawing
together of father and son during their last moments at the station, the
vision of the boy George, the careless happy George who had ridiculed
the thought of war and pursued his millennial dreams of an enlightened
world?that vision was gone. Sometimes Campton fancied that the letters
themselves increased this effect of remoteness. They were necessarily
more guarded than the ones written, before George’s wounding, from an
imaginary H.Q.; but that did not wholly account for the difference.
Campton, in the last analysis, could only say that his vision of his boy
was never quite in focus. Either?as in the moment when George had
comforted Mme. Lebel, or greeted his orderly, or when he had said those
last few broken words at the station?he seemed nearer than ever, seemed
part and substance of his father; or else he became again that beautiful
distant apparition, the winged sentry guarding the Unknown.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The weeks thus punctuated by private anxieties rolled on dark with doom.
At last, in December, came the victory of Verdun. Men took it reverently
but soberly. The price paid had been too heavy for rejoicing; and the
horizon was too ominous in other quarters. Campton had hoped that the
New Year would bring his son back on leave; but still George did not
speak of coming. Meanwhile Boylston’s face grew rounder and more
beaming. At last America was stirring in her sleep. “Oh, if only George
were out there!” Boylston used to cry, as if his friend had been an
army. His faith in George’s powers of persuasion was almost mystical.
And not long afterward Campton had the surprise of a visit which seemed,
in the most unforeseen way, to confirm this belief. Returning to his
studio one afternoon he found it tenanted by Mr. Roger Talkett.

The young man, as carefully brushed and equipped as usual, but pale with
emotion, clutched the painter’s hand in a moist grasp.

“My dear Master, I had to see you?to see you alone and immediately.”

Campton looked at him with apprehension. What was the meaning of his
“alone”? Had Mrs. Talkett lost her head, and betrayed her secret?or had
she committed some act of imprudence of which the report had come back
to her husband?

“Do sit down,” said the painter weakly.

But his visitor, remaining sternly upright, shook his head and glanced
at his wrist-watch. “My moments,” he said, “are numbered?literally; all
I have time for is to implore you to look after my wife.” He drew a
handkerchief from his glossy cuff, and rubbed his eye-glasses.

“Your wife?” Campton echoed, dismayed.

“My dear sir, haven’t you guessed? It’s George’s wonderful example ...
his inspiration ... I’ve been converted! We men of culture can’t stand
by while the ignorant and illiterate are left to die for us. We must
leave that attitude to the Barbarian. Our duty is to set an example. I’m
off to-night for America?for Plattsburg.”

“Oh??” gasped Campton, wringing his hand.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Boylston burst into the studio the next day. “What did I tell you, sir?
George’s influence?it wakes up everybody. But Talkett?I’ll be hanged if
I should have thought it! And have you seen his wife? She’s a
war-goddess! I went to the station with them: their farewells were
harrowing. At that minute, you know, I believe she’d forgotten that
George ever existed!”

“Well, thank God for that,” Campton cried.

“Yes. Don’t you feel how we’re all being swept into it?” panted Boylston
breathlessly. His face had caught the illumination. “Sealed, as George
says?we’re sealed to the job, every one of us! Even I feel that, sitting
here at a stuffy desk....” He flushed crimson and his eyes filled.
“We’ll be in it, you know; America will?in a few weeks now, I believe!
George was as sure of it as I am. And, of course, if the war goes on,
our army will have to take short-sighted officers; won’t they, sir? As
England and France did from the first. They’ll need the men; they’ll
need us all, sir!”

“They’ll need _you_, my dear chap; and they’ll have you, to the full,
whatever your job is,” Campton smiled; and Boylston, choking back a sob,
dashed off again.

Yes, they were all being swept into it together?swept into the yawning
whirlpool. Campton felt that as clearly as all these young men; he felt
the triviality, the utter unimportance, of all their personal and
private concerns, compared with this great headlong outpouring of life
on the altar of conviction. And he understood why, for youths like
George and Boylston, nothing, however close and personal to them, would
matter till the job was over. “And not even for poor Talkett!” he
reflected whimsically.

That afternoon, curiously appeased, he returned once more to his picture
of his son. He had sketched the boy leaning out of the train window,
smiling back, signalling, saying goodbye, while his destiny rushed him
out into darkness as years ago the train used to rush him back to
school. And while Campton worked he caught the glow again; it rested on
brow and eyes, and spread in sure touches under his happy brush.

One day, as the picture progressed, he wavered over the remembrance of
some little detail of the face, and went in search of an old portfolio
into which, from time to time, he had been in the habit of thrusting his
unfinished studies of George. He plunged his hand into the heap, and
Georges of all ages looked forth at him: round baby-Georges, freckled
schoolboys, a thoughtful long-faced youth (the delicate George of St.
Moritz); but none seemed quite to serve his purpose and he rummaged on
till he came to a page torn from an old sketch-book. It was the pencil
study he had made of George as the lad lay asleep at the Crillon, the
night before his mobilisation.

Campton threw the sketch down on the table; and as he sat staring at it
he relived every phase of the emotion out of which it had been born. How
little he had known then?how little he had understood! He could bear to
look at the drawing now; could bear even to rethink the shuddering
thoughts with which he had once flung it away from him. Was it only
because the atmosphere was filled with a growing sense of hope? Because,
in spite of everything, the victory of Verdun was there to show the
inexhaustible strength of France, because people were more and more sure
that America was beginning to waken ... or just because, after too long
and fierce a strain, human nature always instinctively contrives to get
its necessary whiff of moral oxygen? Or was it that George’s influence
had really penetrated him, and that this strange renewed confidence in
life and in ideals was his son’s message of reassurance?

Certainly the old George was there, close to him, that morning; and
somewhere else?in scenes how different?he was sure that the actual
George, at that very moment, was giving out force and youth and hope to
those about him.

“I couldn’t be doing this if I didn’t understand?at last,” Campton
thought as he turned back to the easel. The little pencil sketch had
given him just the hint he needed, and he took up his palette with a
happy sigh.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A knock broke in on his rapt labour, and without turning he called out:
“Damn it, who are you? Can’t you read the sign? _Not in!_”

The door opened and Mr. Brant entered.

He appeared not to have heard the painter’s challenge; his eyes, from
the threshold, sprang straight to the portrait, and remained vacantly
fastened there. Campton, long afterward, remembered thinking, as he
followed the glance: “He’ll be trying to buy this one too!”

Mr. Brant moistened his lips, and his gaze, detaching itself from
George’s face, moved back in the same vacant way to Campton’s. The two
men looked at each other, and Campton jumped to his feet.

“Not?not???”

Mr. Brant tried to speak, and the useless effort contracted his mouth in
a pitiful grimace.

“_My son?_” Campton shrieked, catching him by the arm. The little man
dropped into a chair.

“Not dead ... not dead.... Hope ... hope ...” was shaken out of him in
jerks of anguish.

The door burst open again, and Boylston dashed in beaming. He waved
aloft a handful of morning papers.

“America! You’ve seen? They’ve sacked Bernstorff! Broken off
diplomatic??”

His face turned white, and he stood staring incredulously from one of
the two bowed men to the other.




                                  XXXV


Campton once more stood leaning in the window of a Paris hospital.

Before him, but viewed at another angle, was spread that same great
spectacle of the Place de la Concorde that he had looked down at from
the Crillon on the eve of mobilisation; behind him, in a fresh white
bed, George lay in the same attitude as when his father had stood in the
door of his room and sketched him while he slept.

All day there had run through Campton’s mind the _clairvoyante’s_
promise to Julia: “Your son will come back soon, and will never be sent
to the front again.”

Ah, this time it was true?never, never would he be sent to the front
again! They had him fast now, had him safe. That was the one certainty.
Fast how, safe how??the answer to that had long hung in the balance. For
two weeks or more after his return the surgeons had hesitated. Then
youth had seemed to conquer, and the parents had been told to hope that
after a long period of immobility George’s shattered frame would slowly
re-knit, and he would walk again?or at least hobble. A month had gone by
since then; and Campton could at last trust himself to cast his mind
back over the intervening days, so like in their anguish to those at
Doullens, yet so different in all that material aid and organization
could give.

Evacuation from the base, now so systematically and promptly effected,
had become a matter of course in all but the gravest cases; and even the
delicate undertaking of deflecting George’s course from the hospital
near the front to which he had been destined, and bringing him to Paris,
had been accomplished by a word in the right quarter from Mr. Brant.

Campton, from the first, had been opposed to the attempt to bring George
to Paris; partly perhaps because he felt that in the quiet provincial
hospital near the front he would be able to have his son to himself. At
any rate, the journey would have been shorter; though, as against that,
Paris offered more possibilities of surgical aid. His opposition had
been violent enough to check his growing friendliness with the Brants;
and at the hours when they came to see George, Campton now most often
contrived to be absent. Well, at any rate, George was alive, he was
there under his father’s eye, he was going to live: there seemed to be
no doubt about it now. Campton could think it all over slowly and even
calmly, marvelling at the miracle and taking it in.... So at least he
had imagined till he first made the attempt; then the old sense of
unreality enveloped him again, and he struggled vainly to clutch at
something tangible amid the swimming mists. “George?George?George??” He
used to say the name over and over below his breath, as he sat and
watched at his son’s bedside; but it sounded far off and hollow, like
the voice of a ghost calling to another.

Who was “George”? What did the name represent? The father left his post
in the window and turned back to the bed, once more searching the boy’s
face for enlightenment. But George’s eyes were closed: sleep lay on him
like an impenetrable veil. The sleep of ordinary men was not like that:
the light of their daily habits continued to shine through the chinks of
their closed faces. But with these others, these who had been down into
the lower circles of the pit, it was different: sleep instantly and
completely sucked them back into the unknown. There were times when
Campton, thus watching beside his son, used to say to himself: “If he
were dead he could not be farther from me”?so deeply did George seem
plunged in secret traffic with things unutterable.

Now and then Campton, sitting beside him, seemed to see a little way
into those darknesses; but after a moment he always shuddered back to
daylight, benumbed, inadequate, weighed down with the weakness of the
flesh and the incapacity to reach beyond his habitual limit of
sensation. “No wonder they don’t talk to us,” he mused.

By-and-bye, perhaps, when George was well again, and the war over, the
father might penetrate into his son’s mind, and find some new ground of
communion with him: now the thing was not to be conceived.

He recalled again Adele Anthony’s asking him, when he had come back from
Doullens: “What was the first thing you felt?” and his answering:
“Nothing.”... Well, it was like that now: every vibration had ceased in
him. Between himself and George lay the unbridgeable abyss of his son’s
experiences.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As he sat there, the door was softly opened a few inches and Boylston’s
face showed through the crack: light shot from it like the rays around a
chalice. At a sign from him Campton slipped out into the corridor and
Boylston silently pushed a newspaper into his grasp. He bent over it,
trying with dazzled eyes to read sense into the staring head-lines: but
“America?America?America??” was all that he could see.

A nurse came gliding up on light feet: the tears were running down her
face. “Yes?I know, I know, I know!” she exulted. Up the tall stairs and
through the ramifying of long white passages rose an unwonted rumour of
sound, checked, subdued, invisibly rebuked, but ever again breaking out,
like the noise of ripples on a windless beach. In every direction nurses
and orderlies were speeding from one room to another of the house of
pain with the message: “America has declared war on Germany.”

Campton and Boylston stole back into George’s room. George lifted his
eyelids and smiled at them, understanding before they spoke.

“The sixth of April! Remember the date!” Boylston cried over him in a
gleeful whisper.

The wounded man, held fast in his splints, contrived to raise his head a
little. His eyes laughed back into Boylston’s. “You’ll be in uniform
within a week!” he said; and Boylston crimsoned.

Campton turned away again to the window. The day had come?had come; and
his son had lived to see it. So many of George’s comrades had gone down
to death without hope; and in a few months more George, leaning from
that same window?or perhaps well enough to be watching the spectacle
with his father from the terrace of the Tuileries?would look out on the
first brown battalions marching across the Place de la Concorde, where
father and son, in the early days of the war, had seen the young
recruits of the Foreign Legion patrolling under improvised flags.

At the thought Campton felt a loosening of the tightness about his
heart. Something which had been confused and uncertain in his relation
to the whole long anguish was abruptly lifted, giving him the same sense
of buoyancy that danced in Boylston’s glance. At last, random atoms that
they were, they seemed all to have been shaken into their places,
pressed into the huge mysterious design which was slowly curving a new
firmament over a new earth....

There was another knock; and a jubilant nurse appeared, hardly visible
above a great bunch of lilacs tied with a starred and striped ribbon.
Campton, as he passed the flowers over to his son, noticed an envelope
with Mrs. Talkett’s perpendicular scrawl. George lay smiling, the lilacs
close to his pillow, his free hand fingering the envelope; but he did
not unseal the letter, and seemed to care less than ever to talk.

After an interval the door opened again, this time to show Mr. Brant’s
guarded face. He drew back slightly at the sight of Campton; but
Boylston, jumping up, passed close to the painter to breathe: “To-day,
sir, just to-day?you must!”

Campton went to the door and signed silently to Mr. Brant to enter.
Julia Brant stood outside, flushed and tearful, carrying as many orchids
as Mrs. Talkett had sent lilacs. Campton held out his hand, and with an
embarrassed haste she stammered: “We couldn’t wait??” Behind her he saw
Adele Anthony hurriedly coming up the stairs.

For a few minutes they all stood or sat about George’s bed, while their
voices, beginning to speak low, rose uncontrollably, interrupting one
another with tears and laughter. Mr. Brant and Boylston were both
brimming with news, and George, though he listened more than he spoke,
now and then put a brief question which loosened fresh floods. Suddenly
Campton noticed that the young man’s face, which had been too flushed,
grew pale; but he continued to smile, and his eyes to move responsively
from one illuminated face to the other. Campton, seeing that the others
meant to linger, presently rose and slipping out quietly walked across
the Rue de Rivoli to the deserted terrace of the Tuileries. There he sat
for a long time, looking out on the vast glittering spaces of the Place
de la Concorde, and calling up, with his painter’s faculty of vivid and
precise visualization, a future vision of interminable lines of brown
battalions marching past.

When he returned to the hospital after dinner the night-nurse met him.
She was not quite as well satisfied with her patient that evening:
hadn’t he perhaps had too many visitors? Yes, of course?she knew it had
been a great day, a day of international rejoicing, above all a blessed
day for France. But the doctors, from the beginning, must have warned
Mr. Campton that his son ought to be kept quiet-very quiet. The last
operation had been a great strain on his heart. Yes, certainly, Mr.
Campton might go in; the patient had asked for him. Oh, there was no
danger?no need for anxiety; only he must not stay too long; his son must
try to sleep.

Campton nodded, and stole in.

George lay motionless in the shaded lamplight: his eyes were open, but
they seemed to reflect his father’s presence without any change of
expression, like mirrors rather than like eyes. The room was doubly
silent after the joyful hubbub of the afternoon. The nurse had put the
orchids and lilacs where George’s eyes could rest on them. But was it on
the flowers that his gaze so tranquilly dwelt? Or did he see in their
place the faces of their senders? Or was he again in that far country
whither no other eyes could follow him?

Campton took his usual seat by the bed. Father and son looked at each
other, and the old George glanced out for half a second between the
wounded man’s lids.

“There was too much talking to-day,” Campton grumbled.

“Was there? I didn’t notice,” his son smiled.

No?he hadn’t noticed; he didn’t notice anything. He was a million miles
away again, whirling into his place in the awful pattern of that new
firmament....

“Tired, old man?” Campton asked under his breath.

“No; just glad,” said George contentedly.

His father laid a hand on his and sat silently beside him while the
spring night blew in upon them through the open window. The quiet
streets grew quieter, the hush in their hearts seemed gradually to steal
over the extinguished city. Campton kept saying to himself: “I must be
off,” and still not moving. The nurse was sure to come back
presently?why should he not wait till she dismissed him?

After a while, seeing that George’s eyes had closed, Campton rose, and
crept across the room to darken the lamp with a newspaper. His movement
must have roused his son, for he heard a slight struggle behind him and
the low cry: “Father!”

Campton turned and reached the bed in a stride. George, ashy-white, had
managed to lift himself a little on his free elbow.

“Anything wrong?” the father cried.

“No; everything all right,” George said. He dropped back, his lids
closing again, and a single twitch ran through the hand that Campton had
seized. After that he lay stiller than ever.




                                 XXXVI


George’s prediction had come true. At his funeral, three days afterward,
Boylston, a new-fledged member of the American Military Mission, was
already in uniform....

But through what perversity of attention did the fact strike Campton, as
he stood, a blank unfeeling automaton, in the front pew behind that
coffin draped with flags and flanked with candle-glitter? Why did one
thing rather than another reach to his deadened brain, and mostly the
trivial things, such as Boylston’s being already in uniform, and poor
Julia’s nose, under the harsh crape, looking so blue-red without its
powder, and the chaplain’s asking “O grave, where is thy victory?” in
the querulous tone of a schoolmaster reproaching a pupil who mislaid
things? It was always so with Campton: when sorrow fell it left him
insensible and dumb. Not till long afterward did he begin to feel its
birth-pangs....

                  *       *       *       *       *

They first came to him, those pangs, on a morning of the following July,
as he sat once more on the terrace of the Tuileries. Most of his time,
during the months since George’s death, had been spent in endless
aimless wanderings up and down the streets of Paris: and that day,
descending early from Montmartre, he had noticed in his listless way
that all the buildings on his way were fluttering with American flags.
The fact left him indifferent: Paris was always decorating nowadays for
one ally or another. Then he remembered that it must be the Fourth of
July; but the idea of the Fourth of July came to him, through the same
haze of indifference, as a mere far-off childish memory of surreptitious
explosions and burnt fingers. He strolled on toward the Tuileries, where
he had got into the way of sitting for hours at a time, looking across
the square at what had once been George’s window.

He was surprised to find the Rue de Rivoli packed with people; but his
only thought was the instinctive one of turning away to avoid them, and
he began to retrace his steps in the direction of the Louvre. Then at a
corner he paused again and looked back at the Place de la Concorde. It
was not curiosity that drew him, heaven knew?he would never again be
curious about anything?but he suddenly remembered the day three months
earlier when, leaning from George’s window in the hospital, he had said
to himself “By the time our first regiments arrive he’ll be up and
looking at them from here, or sitting with me over there on the
terrace”; and that decided him to turn back. It was as if he had felt
the pressure of George’s hand on his arm.

Though it was still so early he had some difficulty in pushing his way
through the throng. No seats were left on the terrace, but he managed to
squeeze into a corner near one of the great vases of the balustrade; and
leaning there, with the happy hubbub about him, he watched and waited.

Such a summer morning it was?and such a strange grave beauty had fallen
on the place! He seemed to understand for the first time?he who had
served Beauty all his days?how profoundly, at certain hours, it may
become the symbol of things hoped for and things died for. All those
stately spaces and raying distances, witnesses of so many memorable
scenes, might have been called together just as the setting for this one
event?the sight of a few brown battalions passing over them like a
feeble trail of insects.

Campton, with a vague awakening of interest, glanced about him, studying
the faces of the crowd. Old and young, infirm and healthy, civilians and
soldiers?ah, the soldiers!?all were exultant, confident, alive. Alive!
The word meant something new to him now?something so strange and
unnatural that his mind still hung and brooded over it. For now that
George was dead, by what mere blind propulsion did all these thousands
of human beings keep on mechanically living?

He became aware that a boy, leaning over intervening shoulders, was
trying to push a folded paper into his hand. On it was pencilled, in Mr.
Brant’s writing: “There will be a long time to wait. Will you take the
seat I have kept next to mine?” Campton glanced down the terrace, saw
where the little man sat at its farther end, and shook his head. Then
some contradictory impulse made him decide to get up, laboriously work
his halting frame through the crowd, and insert himself into the place
next to Mr. Brant. The two men nodded without shaking hands; after that
they sat silent, their eyes on the empty square. Campton noticed that
Mr. Brant wore his usual gray clothes, but with a mourning band on the
left sleeve. The sight of that little band irritated Campton....

There was, as Mr. Brant had predicted, a long interval of waiting; but
at length a murmur of jubilation rose far off, and gathering depth and
volume came bellowing and spraying up to where they sat. The square, the
Champs Elysees and all the leafy distances were flooded with it: it was
as though the voice of Paris had sprung up in fountains out of her
stones. Then a military march broke shrilly on the tumult; and there
they came at last, in a scant swaying line?so few, so new, so raw; so
little, in comparison with the immense assemblages familiar to the
place, so much in meaning and in promise.

“How badly they march?there hasn’t even been time to drill them
properly!” Campton thought; and at the thought he felt a choking in his
throat, and his sorrow burst up in him in healing springs....

                  *       *       *       *       *

It was after that day that he first went back to his work. He had not
touched paint or pencil since George’s death; now he felt the
inspiration and the power returning, and he began to spend his days
among the young American officers and soldiers, studying them, talking
to them, going about with them, and then hurrying home to jot down his
impressions. He had not, as yet, looked at his last study of George, or
opened the portfolio with the old sketches; if any one had asked him, he
would probably have said that they no longer interested him. His whole
creative faculty was curiously, mysteriously engrossed in the recording
of the young faces for whose coming George had yearned.

“It’s their marching so badly?it’s their not even having had time to be
drilled!” he said to Boylston, half-shamefacedly, as they sat together
one August evening in the studio window.

Campton seldom saw Boylston nowadays. All the young man’s time was taken
up by his job with the understaffed and inexperienced Military Mission;
but fagged as he was by continual overwork and heavy responsibilities,
his blinking eyes had at last lost their unsatisfied look, and his whole
busy person radiated hope and encouragement.

On the day in question he had turned up unexpectedly, inviting himself
to dine with Campton and smoke a cigar afterward in the quiet window
overhanging Paris. Campton was glad to have him there; no one could tell
him more than Boylston about the American soldiers, their numbers, the
accommodations prepared for their reception, their first contact with
the other belligerents, and their own view of the business they were
about. And the two chatted quietly in the twilight till the young man,
rising, said it was time to be off.

“Back to your shop?”

“Rather! There’s a night’s work ahead. But I’m as good as new after our
talk.”

Campton looked at him wistfully. “You know I’d like to paint you some
day.”

“Oh??” cried Boylston, suffused with blushes; and added with a laugh:
“It’s my uniform, not me.”

“Well, your uniform _is_ you?it’s all of you young men.”

Boylston stood in the window twisting his cap about undecidedly. “Look
here, sir?now that you’ve got back to work again??”

“Well?” Campton interrupted suspiciously.

The young man cleared his throat and spoke with a rush. “His mother
wants most awfully that something should be decided about the monument.”

“Monument? What monument? I don’t want my son to have a monument,”
Campton exploded.

But Boylston stuck to his point. “It’ll break her heart if something
isn’t put on the grave before long. It’s five months now?and they fully
recognize your right to decide??”

“Damn what they recognize! It was they who brought him to Paris; they
made him travel when he wasn’t fit; they killed him.”

“Well?supposing they did: judge how much more they must be suffering!”

“Let ’em suffer. He’s my son?my son. He isn’t Brant’s.”

“Miss Anthony thinks??”

“And he’s not hers either, that I know of!”

Boylston seemed to hesitate. “Well, that’s just it, isn’t it, sir?
You’ve had him; you have him still. Nobody can touch that fact, or take
it from you. Every hour of his life was yours. But they’ve never had
anything, those two others, Mr. Brant and Miss Anthony; nothing but a
reflected light. And so every outward sign means more to them. I’m
putting it badly, I know??”

Campton held out his hand. “You don’t mean to, I suppose. But better not
put it at all. Good night,” he said. And on the threshold he called out
sardonically: “And who’s going to pay for a monument, I’d like to know?”

                  *       *       *       *       *

A monument?they wanted a monument! Wanted him to decide about it, plan
it, perhaps design it?good Lord, he didn’t know! No doubt it all seemed
simple enough to them: anything did, that money could buy.... When he
couldn’t yet bear to turn that last canvas out from the wall, or look
into the old portfolio even.... Suffering, suffering! What did they any
of them know about suffering? Going over old photographs, comparing
studies, recalling scenes and sayings, discussing with some sculptor or
other the shape of George’s eyelids, the spring of his chest-muscles,
the way his hair grew and his hands moved?why, it was like digging him
up again out of that peaceful corner of the Neuilly cemetery where at
last he was resting, like dragging him back to the fret and the fever,
and the senseless roar of the guns that still went on.

And then: as he’d said to Boylston, who was to pay for their monument?
Even if the making of it had struck him as a way of getting nearer to
his boy, instead of building up a marble wall between them?even if the
idea had appealed to him, he hadn’t a penny to spare for such an
undertaking. In the first place, he never intended to paint again for
money; never intended to do anything but these gaunt and serious or
round and babyish young American faces above their stiff military
collars, and when their portraits were finished to put them away, locked
up for his own pleasure; and what he had earned in the last years was to
be partly for these young men?for their reading-rooms, clubs, recreation
centres, whatever was likely to give them temporary rest and solace in
the grim months to come; and partly for such of the proteges of “The
Friends of French Art” as had been deprived of aid under the new
management. Tales of private jealousy and petty retaliation came to
Campton daily, now that Mme. Beausite administered the funds; Adele
Anthony and Mlle. Davril, bursting with the wrongs of their pensioners,
were always appealing to him for help. And then, hidden behind these
more or less valid reasons, the old instinctive dread of spending had
reasserted itself, he couldn’t tell how or why, unless through some dim
opposition to the Brants’ perpetual outpouring: their hospitals, their
motors, their bribes, their orchids, and now their monument?_their_
monument!

He sought refuge from it all with his soldiers, haunting for hours every
day one of the newly-opened Soldiers’ and Sailors’ Clubs. Adele Anthony
had already found a job there, and was making a success of it. She
looked twenty years older since George was gone, but she stuck to her
work with the same humorous pertinacity; and with her mingled heartiness
and ceremony, her funny resuscitation of obsolete American slang, and
her ability to answer all their most disconcerting questions about Paris
and France (Montmartre included), she easily eclipsed the ministering
angels who twanged the home-town chord and called them “boys.”

The young men appeared to return Campton’s liking; it was as if they had
guessed that he needed them, and wanted to offer him their shy help. He
was conscious of something rather protecting in their attitude, of his
being to them a vague unidentified figure, merely “the old gentleman”
who was friendly to them; but he didn’t mind. It was enough to sit and
listen to their talk, to try and clear up a few of the countless puzzles
which confronted them, to render them such fatherly services as he
could, and in the interval to jot down notes of their faces?their
inexhaustibly inspiring faces. Sometimes to talk with them was like
being on the floor in George’s nursery, among the blocks and the tin
soldiers; sometimes like walking with young archangels in a cool empty
heaven; but wherever he was he always had the sense of being among his
own, the sense he had never had since George’s death.

To think of them all as George’s brothers, to study out the secret
likeness to him in their young dedicated faces: that was now his one
passion, his sustaining task; it was at such times that his son came
back and sat among them....

Gradually, as the weeks passed, the first of his new friends, officers
and soldiers, were dispersed throughout the training camps, and new
faces succeeded to those he had tried to fix on his canvas; an endless
line of Benny Upshers, baby-Georges, schoolboy Boylstons, they seemed to
be. Campton saw each one go with a fresh pang, knowing that every move
brought them so much nearer to the front, that ever-ravening and
inexorable front. They were always happy to be gone; and that only
increased his pain. Now and then he attached himself more particularly
to one of the young men, because of some look of the eyes or some turn
of the mind like George’s; and then the parting became anguish.

One day a second lieutenant came to the studio to take leave. He had
been an early recruit of Plattsburg, and his military training was so
far advanced that he counted on being among the first officers sent to
the fighting line. He was a fresh-coloured lad, with fair hair that
stood up in a defiant crest.

“There are so few of us, and there’s so little time to lose; they can’t
afford to be too particular,” he laughed.

It was just the sort of thing that George would have said, and the laugh
was like an echo of George’s. At the sound Campton suddenly burst into
tears, and was aware of his visitor’s looking at him with eyes of dismay
and compassion.

“Oh, don’t, sir, _don’t_,” the young man pleaded, wringing the painter’s
hand, and making what decent haste he could to get out of the studio.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Campton, left alone, turned once more to his easel. He sat down before a
canvas on which he had blocked out a group of soldiers playing cards at
their club; but after a stroke or two he threw aside his brush, and
remained with his head bowed on his hands, a lonely tired old man.

He had kept a cheerful front at his son’s going; and now he could not
say goodbye to one of these young fellows without crying. Well?it was
because he had no one left of his own, he supposed. Loneliness like his
took all a man’s strength from him....

The bell rang, but he did not move. It rang again; then the door was
pushed timidly open, and Mrs. Talkett came in. He had not seen her since
the day of George’s funeral, when he had fancied he detected her in a
shrunken black-veiled figure hurrying past in the meaningless line of
mourners.

In her usual abrupt fashion she began, without a greeting: “I’ve come to
say goodbye; I’m going to America.”

He looked at her remotely, hardly hearing what she said. “To America?”

“Yes; to join my husband.”

He continued to consider her in silence, and she frowned in her
perplexed and fretful way. “He’s at Plattsburg, you know.” Her eyes
wandered unseeingly about the studio. “There’s nothing else to do, is
there?now?here or anywhere? So I sail to-morrow; I mean to take a house
somewhere near him. He’s not well, and he writes that he misses me. The
life in camp is so unsuited to him??”

Campton still listened absently. “Oh, you’re right to go,” he agreed at
length, supposing it was what she expected of him.

“Am I?” She half-smiled. “What’s right and what’s wrong? I don’t know
any longer. I’m only trying to do what I suppose George would have
wanted.” She stood uncertainly in front of Campton. “All I _do_ know,”
she cried, with a sharp break in her voice, “is that I’ve never in my
life been happy enough to be so unhappy!” And she threw herself down on
the divan in a storm of desolate sobbing.

After he had comforted her as best he could, and she had gone away,
Campton continued to wander up and down the studio forlornly. That cry
of hers kept on echoing in his ears: “I’ve never in my life been happy
enough to be so unhappy!” It associated itself suddenly with a phrase of
Boylston’s that he had brushed away unheeding: “You’ve had your son?you
have him still; but those others have never had anything.”

Yes; Campton saw now that it was true of poor Madge Talkett, as it was
of Adele Anthony and Mr. Brant, and even in a measure of Julia. They had
never?no, not even George’s mother?had anything, in the close
inextricable sense in which Campton had had his son. And it was only
now, in his own hour of destitution, that he understood how much greater
the depth of their poverty had been. He recalled the frightened
embarrassed look of the young lieutenant whom he had discountenanced by
his tears; and he said to himself: “The only thing that helps is to be
able to do things for people. I suppose that’s why Brant’s always
trying??”

Julia too: it was strange that his thoughts should turn to her with such
peculiar pity. It was not because the boy had been born of her body:
Campton did not see her now, as he once had in a brief moment of
compassion, as the young mother bending illumined above her baby. He saw
her as an old empty-hearted woman, and asked himself how such an
unmanageable monster as grief was to fill the room up of her absent son.

What did such people as Julia do with grief, he wondered, how did they
make room for it in their lives, get up and lie down every day with its
taste on their lips? Its elemental quality, that awful sense it
communicated of a whirling earth, a crumbling Time, and all the cold
stellar spaces yawning to receive us?these feelings which he was
beginning to discern and to come to terms with in his own way (and with
the sense that it would have been George’s way too), these feelings
could never give their stern appeasement to Julia.... Her religion? Yes,
such as it was no doubt it would help; talking with the Rector would
help; giving more time to her church-charities, her wounded soldiers,
imagining that she was paying some kind of tax on her affliction. But
the vacant evenings, at home, face to face with Brant! Campton had long
since seen that the one thing which had held the two together was their
shared love of George; and if Julia discovered, as she could hardly fail
to do, how much more deeply Brant had loved her son than she had, and
how much more inconsolably he mourned him, that would only increase her
sense of isolation. And so, in sheer self-defence, she would gradually,
stealthily, fill up the void with the old occupations, with bridge and
visits and secret consultations at the dressmaker’s about the width of
crape on her dresses; and all the while the object of life would be gone
for her. Yes; he pitied Julia most of all.

But Mr. Brant too?perhaps in a different way it was he who suffered
most. For the stellar spaces were not exactly Mr. Brant’s native
climate, and yet voices would call to him from them, and he would not
know....

There were moments when Campton looked about him with astonishment at
the richness of his own denuded life; when George was in the sunset, in
the voices of young people, or in any trivial joke that father and son
would have shared; and other moments when he was nowhere, utterly lost,
extinct and irrecoverable; and others again when the one thing which
could have vitalized the dead business of living would have been to see
him shove open the studio door, stalk in, pour out some coffee for
himself in his father’s cup, and diffuse through the air the warm sense
of his bodily presence, the fresh smell of his clothes and his flesh and
his hair. But through all these moods, Campton began to see, there ran
the life-giving power of a reality embraced and accepted. George had
been; George was; as long as his father’s consciousness lasted, George
would be as much a part of it as the closest, most actual of his
immediate sensations. He had missed nothing of George, and here was his
harvest, his golden harvest.

Such states of mind were not constant with Campton; but more and more
often, when they came, they swept him on eagle wings over the next
desert to the next oasis; and so, gradually, the meaningless days became
linked to each other in some kind of intelligible sequence.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Boylston, after the talk which had so agitated Campton, did not turn up
again at the studio for some time; but when he next appeared the
painter, hardly pausing to greet him, began at once, as if they had just
parted: “That monument you spoke about the other day ... you know....”

Boylston glanced at him in surprise.

“If they want me to do it, I’ll do it,” Campton went on, jerking the
words out abruptly and walking away toward the window. He had not known,
till he began, that he had meant to utter them, or how difficult they
would be to say; and he stood there a moment struggling with the
unreasoning rebellious irritability which so often lay in wait for his
better impulses. At length he turned back, his hands in his pockets,
clinking his change as he had done the first time that Boylston had come
to him for help. “But as I plan the thing,” he began again, in a queer
growling tone, “it’s going to cost a lot?everything of the sort does
nowadays, especially in marble. It’s hard enough to get any one to do
that kind of work at all. And prices have about tripled, you know.”

Boylston’s eyes filled, and he nodded, still without speaking.

“That’s just what Brant’ll like though, isn’t it?” Campton said, with an
irrepressible sneer in his voice. He saw Boylston redden and look away,
and he too flushed to the forehead and broke off ashamed. Suddenly he
had the vision of Mr. Brant effacing himself at the foot of the hospital
stairs when they had arrived at Doullens; Mr. Brant drawing forth the
copy of the orderly’s letter in the dark fog-swept cloister; Mr. Brant
always yielding, always holding back, yet always remembering to do or to
say the one thing the father’s lacerated soul could bear.

“And he’s had nothing?nothing?nothing!” Campton thought.

He turned again to Boylston, his face still flushed, his lips twitching.
“Tell them?tell Brant?that I’ll design the thing; I’ll design it, and he
shall pay for it. He’ll want to?I understand that. Only, for God’s sake,
don’t let him come here and thank me?at least not for a long time!”

Boylston again nodded silently, and turned to go.

After he had gone the painter moved back to his long table. He had
always had a fancy for modelling?had always had lumps of clay lying
about within reach. He pulled out all the sketches of his son from the
old portfolio, spread them before him on the table, and began.

 PARIS, 1918?Saint Brice-Sous-Foret, 1922.


                                THE END

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. P. 62, changed “we was surprised” to “he was surprised”.
 2. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 3. Retained anachronistic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as
      printed.
 4. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 5. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Son at the Front, by Edith Wharton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SON AT THE FRONT ***

***** This file should be named 59437-0.txt or 59437-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/4/3/59437/

Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Son at the Front, by Edith Wharton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: A Son at the Front

Author: Edith Wharton

Release Date: May 5, 2019 [EBook #59437]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SON AT THE FRONT ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









 _BY EDITH WHARTON_


 A SON AT THE FRONT
 THE GREATER INCLINATION
 THE TOUCHSTONE
 CRUCIAL INSTANCES
 THE VALLEY OF DECISION
 SANCTUARY
 THE DESCENT OF MAN
 THE HOUSE OF MIRTH
 THE FRUIT OF THE TREE
 THE HERMIT AND THE WILD WOMAN
 TALES OF MEN AND GHOSTS
 ETHAN FROME
 THE CUSTOM OF THE COUNTRY
 XINGU

 IN MOROCCO
 FIGHTING FRANCE
 ITALIAN BACKGROUNDS
 A MOTOR FLIGHT THROUGH FRANCE
 ARTEMIS TO ACTÆON
 THE DECORATION OF HOUSES

 _CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS_




                           A SON AT THE FRONT


                                    BY
                              EDITH WHARTON

 _Something veil’d and abstracted is often a part of the manners of these
                          beings._?WALT WHITMAN


                                 NEW YORK
                         CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS
                                 MCMXXIII




                       COPYRIGHT, 1922, 1923, BY
                        CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS

                Printed in the United States of America

                       Published September, 1923


[Illustration]




                               IN MEMORY

                                   OF

                             RONALD SIMMONS

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 BOOK I




                           A SON AT THE FRONT




                                   I


John Campton, the American portrait-painter, stood in his bare studio in
Montmartre at the end of a summer afternoon contemplating a battered
calendar that hung against the wall.

The calendar marked July 30, 1914.

Campton looked at this date with a gaze of unmixed satisfaction. His
son, his only boy, who was coming from America, must have landed in
England that morning, and after a brief halt in London would join him
the next evening in Paris. To bring the moment nearer, Campton, smiling
at his weakness, tore off the leaf and uncovered the 31. Then, leaning
in the window, he looked out over his untidy scrap of garden at the
silver-grey sea of Paris spreading mistily below him.

A number of visitors had passed through the studio that day. After years
of obscurity Campton had been projected into the light?or perhaps only
into the limelight?by his portrait of his son George, exhibited three
years earlier at the spring show of the French Society of Painters and
Sculptors. The picture seemed to its author to be exactly in the line of
the unnoticed things he had been showing before, though perhaps nearer
to what he was always trying for, because of the exceptional interest of
his subject. But to the public he had appeared to take a new turn; or
perhaps some critic had suddenly found the right phrase for him; or,
that season, people wanted a new painter to talk about. Didn’t he know
by heart all the Paris reasons for success or failure?

The early years of his career had given him ample opportunity to learn
them. Like other young students of his generation, he had come to Paris
with an exaggerated reverence for the few conspicuous figures who made
the old Salons of the ’eighties like bad plays written around a few
stars. If he could get near enough to Beausite, the ruling light of the
galaxy, he thought he might do things not unworthy of that great master;
but Beausite, who had ceased to receive pupils, saw no reason for making
an exception in favour of an obscure youth without a backing. He was not
kind; and on the only occasion when a painting of Campton’s came under
his eye he let fall an epigram which went the round of Paris, but
shocked its victim by its revelation of the great man’s ineptitude.

Campton, if he could have gone on admiring Beausite’s work, would have
forgotten his unkindness and even his critical incapacity; but as the
young painter’s personal convictions developed he discovered that his
idol had none, and that the dazzling _maestria_ still enveloping his
work was only the light from a dead star.

All these things were now nearly thirty years old. Beausite had vanished
from the heavens, and the youth he had sneered at throned there in his
stead. Most of the people who besieged Campton’s studio were the lineal
descendants of those who had echoed Beausite’s sneer. They belonged to
the types that Campton least cared to paint; but they were usually those
who paid the highest prices, and he had lately had new and imperious
reasons for wanting to earn all the money he could. So for two years he
had let it be as difficult and expensive as possible to be “done by
Campton”; and this oppressive July day had been crowded with the visits
of suppliants of a sort unused to waiting on anybody’s pleasure, people
who had postponed St. Moritz and Deauville, Aix and Royat, because it
was known that one had to accept the master’s conditions or apply
elsewhere.

The job bored him more than ever; the more of their fatuous faces he
recorded the more he hated the task; but for the last two or three days
the monotony of his toil had been relieved by a new element of interest.
This was produced by what he called the “war-funk,” and consisted in the
effect on his sitters and their friends of the suggestion that something
new, incomprehensible and uncomfortable might be about to threaten the
ordered course of their pleasures.

Campton himself did not “believe in the war” (as the current phrase
went); therefore he was able to note with perfect composure its
agitating effect upon his sitters. On the whole the women behaved best:
the idiotic Mme. de Dolmetsch had actually grown beautiful through fear
for her lover, who turned out (in spite of a name as exotic as hers) to
be a French subject of military age. The men had made a less creditable
showing?especially the big banker and promoter, Jorgenstein, whose round
red face had withered like a pricked balloon, and young Prince Demetrios
Palamedes, just married to the fabulously rich daughter of an Argentine
wheat-grower, and so secure as to his bride’s fortune that he could
curse impartially all the disturbers of his summer plans. Even the great
tuberculosis specialist, Fortin-Lescluze, whom Campton was painting in
return for the physician’s devoted care of George the previous year, had
lost something of his professional composure, and no longer gave out the
sense of tranquillizing strength which had been such a help in the boy’s
fight for health. Fortin-Lescluze, always in contact with the rulers of
the earth, must surely have some hint of their councils. Whatever it
was, he revealed nothing, but continued to talk frivolously and
infatuatedly about a new Javanese dancer whom he wanted Campton to
paint; but his large beaked face with its triumphant moustache had grown
pinched and grey, and he had forgotten to renew the dye on the
moustache.

Campton’s one really imperturbable visitor was little Charlie Alicante,
the Spanish secretary of Embassy at Berlin, who had dropped in on his
way to St. Moritz, bringing the newest news from the Wilhelmstrasse news
that was all suavity and reassurance, with a touch of playful reproach
for the irritability of French feeling, and a reminder of Imperial
longanimity in regard to the foolish misunderstandings of Agadir and
Saverne.

Now all the visitors had gone, and Campton, leaning in the window,
looked out over Paris and mused on his summer plans. He meant to plunge
straight down to Southern Italy and Sicily, perhaps even push over to
North Africa. That at least was what he hoped for: no sun was too hot
for him and no landscape too arid. But it all depended on George; for
George was going with him, and if George preferred Spain they would
postpone the desert.

It was almost impossible to Campton to picture what it would be like to
have the boy with him. For so long he had seen his son only in snatches,
hurriedly, incompletely, uncomprehendingly: it was only in the last
three years that their intimacy had had a chance to develop. And they
had never travelled together, except for hasty dashes, two or three
times, to seashore or mountains; had never gone off on a long solitary
journey such as this. Campton, tired, disenchanted, and nearing sixty,
found himself looking forward to the adventure with an eagerness as
great as the different sort of ardour with which, in his youth, he had
imagined flights of another kind with the woman who was to fulfill every
dream.

“Well?I suppose that’s the stuff pictures are made of,” he thought,
smiling at his inextinguishable belief in the completeness of his next
experience. Life had perpetually knocked him down just as he had his
hand on her gifts; nothing had ever succeeded with him but his work. But
he was as sure as ever that peace of mind and contentment of heart were
waiting for him round the next corner; and this time, it was clear, they
were to come to him through his wonderful son.

The doorbell rang, and he listened for the maidservant’s step. There was
another impatient jingle, and he remembered that his faithful Mariette
had left for Lille, where she was to spend her vacation with her family.
Campton, reaching for his stick, shuffled across the studio with his
lame awkward stride.

At the door stood his old friend Paul Dastrey, one of the few men with
whom he had been unbrokenly intimate since the first days of his
disturbed and incoherent Parisian life. Dastrey came in without
speaking: his small dry face, seamed with premature wrinkles of irony
and sensitiveness, looked unusually grave. The wrinkles seemed suddenly
to have become those of an old man; and how grey Dastrey had turned! He
walked a little stiffly, with a jauntiness obviously intended to conceal
a growing tendency to rheumatism.

In the middle of the floor he paused and tapped a varnished boot-tip
with his stick.

“Let’s see what you’ve done to Daisy Dolmetsch.”

“Oh, it’s been done for me?you’ll see!” Campton laughed. He was enjoying
the sight of Dastrey and thinking that this visit was providentially
timed to give him a chance of expatiating on his coming journey. In his
rare moments of expansiveness he felt the need of some substitute for
the background of domestic sympathy which, as a rule, would have simply
bored or exasperated him; and at such times he could always talk to
Dastrey.

The little man screwed up his eyes and continued to tap his varnished
toes.

“But she’s magnificent. She’s seen the Medusa!”

Campton laughed again. “Just so. For days and days I’d been trying to do
something with her; and suddenly the war-funk did it for me.”

“The war-funk?”

“Who’d have thought it? She’s frightened to death about Ladislas
Isador?who is French, it turns out, and mobilisable. The poor soul
thinks there’s going to be war!”

“Well, there _is_,” said Dastrey.

The two men looked at each other: Campton amused, incredulous, a shade
impatient at the perpetual recurrence of the same theme, and aware of
presenting a smile of irritating unresponsiveness to his friend’s solemn
gaze.

“Oh, come?you too? Why, the Duke of Alicante has just left here, fresh
from Berlin. You ought to hear him laugh at us....”

“How about Berlin’s laughing at _him_?” Dastrey sank into a wicker
armchair, drew out a cigarette and forgot to light it. Campton returned
to the window.

“There can’t be war: I’m going to Sicily and Africa with George the day
after to-morrow,” he broke out.

“Ah, George??. To be sure....”

There was a silence; Dastrey had not even smiled. He turned the unlit
cigarette in his dry fingers.

“Too young for ’seventy?and too old for this! Some men are born under a
curse,” he burst out.

“What on earth are you talking about?” Campton exclaimed, forcing his
gaiety a little.

Dastrey stared at him with furious eyes. “But I shall get something,
somewhere ... they can’t stop a man’s enlisting ... I had an old uncle
who did it in ’seventy ... he was older than I am now.”

Campton looked at him compassionately. Poor little circumscribed Paul
Dastrey, whose utmost adventure had been an occasional article in an art
review, an occasional six weeks in the near East! It was pitiful to see
him breathing fire and fury on an enemy one knew to be engaged, at that
very moment, in meeting England and France more than half-way in the
effort to smooth over diplomatic difficulties. But Campton could make
allowances for the nerves of the tragic generation brought up in the
shadow of Sedan.

“Look here,” he said, “I’ll tell you what. Come along with George and
me?as far as Palermo, anyhow. You’re a little stiff again in that left
knee, and we can bake our lamenesses together in the good Sicilian
oven.”

Dastrey had found a match and lighted his cigarette.

“My poor Campton?there’ll be war in three days.”

Campton’s incredulity was shot through with the deadly chill of
conviction. There it was?there would be war! It was too like his cursed
luck not to be true.... He smiled inwardly, perceiving that he was
viewing the question exactly as the despicable Jorgenstein and the
fatuous Prince Demetrios had viewed it: as an unwarrantable interference
with his private plans. Yes?but his case was different.... Here was the
son he had never seen enough of, never till lately seen at all as most
fathers see their sons; and the boy was to be packed off to New York
that winter, to go into a bank; and for the Lord knew how many months
this was to be their last chance, as it was almost their first, of being
together quietly, confidentially, uninterruptedly. These other men were
whining at the interruption of their vile pleasures or their viler
money-making; he, poor devil, was trembling for the chance to lay the
foundation of a complete and lasting friendship with his only son, at
the moment when such understandings do most to shape a youth’s
future.... “And with what I’ve had to fight against!” he groaned, seeing
victory in sight, and sickening at the idea that it might be snatched
from him.

Then another thought came, and he felt the blood leaving his ruddy face
and, as it seemed, receding from every vein of his heavy awkward body.
He sat down opposite Dastrey, and the two looked at each other.

“There won’t be war. But if there were?why shouldn’t George and I go to
Sicily? You don’t see us sitting here making lint, do you?”

Dastrey smiled. “Lint is unhygienic; you won’t have to do that. And I
see no reason why _you_ shouldn’t go to Sicily?or to China.” He paused.
“But how about George?I thought he and you were both born in France?”

Campton reached for a cigarette. “We were, worse luck. He’s subject to
your preposterous military regulations. But it doesn’t make any
difference, as it happens. He’s sure to be discharged after that touch
of tuberculosis he had last year, when he had to be rushed up to the
Engadine.”

“Ah, I see. Then, as you say.... Still, of course he wouldn’t be allowed
to leave the country.”

A constrained silence fell between the two. Campton became aware that,
for the first time since they had known each other, their points of view
were the width of the poles apart. It was hopeless to try to bridge such
a distance.

“Of course, you know,” he said, trying for his easiest voice, “I still
consider this discussion purely academic.... But if it turns out that
I’m wrong I shall do all I can?all I can, do you hear??to get George
discharged.... You’d better know that....”

Dastrey, rising, held out his hand with his faithful smile. “My dear old
Campton, I perfectly understand a foreigner’s taking that view....” He
walked toward the door and they parted without more words.

When he had gone Campton began to recover his reassurance. Who was
Dastrey, poor chap, to behave as if he were in the councils of the
powers? It was perfect nonsense to pretend that a diplomatist straight
from Berlin didn’t know more about what was happening there than the
newsmongers of the Boulevards. One didn’t have to be an Ambassador to
see which way the wind was blowing; and men like Alicante, belonging to
a country uninvolved in the affair, were the only people capable of a
cool judgment at moments of international tension.

Campton took the portrait of Mme. de Dolmetsch and leaned it against the
other canvases along the wall. Then he started clumsily to put the room
to rights?without Mariette he was so helpless?and finally, abandoning
the attempt, said to himself: “I’ll come and wind things up to-morrow.”

He was moving that day from the studio to the Hotel de Crillon, where
George was to join him the next evening. It would be jolly to be with
the boy from the moment he arrived; and, even if Mariette’s departure
had not paralyzed his primitive housekeeping, he could not have made
room for his son at the studio. So, reluctantly, for he loathed luxury
and conformity, but joyously, because he was to be with George, Campton
threw some shabby clothes into a shapeless portmanteau, and prepared to
despatch the concierge for a taxicab.

He was hobbling down the stairs when the old woman met him with a
telegram. He tore it open and saw that it was dated Deauville, and was
not, as he had feared, from his son.

“Very anxious. Must see you to-morrow. Please come to Avenue Marigny at
five without fail. Julia Brant.”

“Oh, damn,” Campton growled, crumpling up the message.

The concierge was looking at him with searching eyes.

“Is it war, sir?” she asked, pointing to the bit of blue paper. He
supposed she was thinking of her grandsons.

“No?no?nonsense! War?” He smiled into her shrewd old face, every wrinkle
of which seemed full of a deep human experience.

“War? Can you imagine anything more absurd? Can you, now? What should
you say if they told you war was going to be declared, Mme. Lebel?”

She gave him back his look with profound earnestness; then she spoke in
a voice of sudden resolution. “Why, I should say we don’t want it,
sir?I’d have four in it if it came?_but that this sort of thing has got
to stop_.”

Campton shrugged. “Oh, well?it’s not going to come, so don’t worry. And
call me a taxi, will you? No, no, I’ll carry the bags down myself.”




                                   II


“But even if they do mobilise: mobilisation is not war?_is_ it?” Mrs.
Anderson Brant repeated across the teacups.

Campton dragged himself up from the deep armchair he had inadvertently
chosen. To escape from his hostess’s troubled eyes he limped across to
the window and stood gazing out at the thick turf and brilliant
flower-borders of the garden which was so unlike his own. After a moment
he turned and glanced about him, catching the reflection of his heavy
figure in a mirror dividing two garlanded panels. He had not entered
Mrs. Brant’s drawing-room for nearly ten years; not since the period of
the interminable discussions about the choice of a school for George;
and in spite of the far graver preoccupations that now weighed on him,
and of the huge menace with which the whole world was echoing, he paused
for an instant to consider the contrast between his clumsy person and
that expensive and irreproachable room.

“You’ve taken away Beausite’s portrait of you,” he said abruptly,
looking up at the chimney-panel, which was filled with the blue and
umber bloom of a Fragonard landscape.

A full-length of Mrs. Anderson Brant by Beausite had been one of Mr.
Brant’s wedding-presents to his bride; a Beausite portrait, at that
time, was as much a part of such marriages as pearls and sables.

“Yes. Anderson thought ... the dress had grown so dreadfully
old-fashioned,” she explained indifferently; and went on again: “You
think it’s _not_ war: don’t you?”

What was the use of telling her what he thought? For years and years he
had not done that?about anything. But suddenly, now, a stringent
necessity had drawn them together, confronting them like any two plain
people caught in a common danger?like husband and wife, for example!

“It _is_ war, this time, I believe,” he said.

She set down her cup with a hand that had begun to tremble.

“I disagree with you entirely,” she retorted, her voice shrill with
anxiety. “I was frightfully upset when I sent you that telegram
yesterday; but I’ve been lunching to-day with the old Duc de
Montlhery?you know he fought in ’seventy?and with Levi-Michel of the
‘Jour,’ who had just seen some of the government people; and they both
explained to me quite clearly??”

“That you’d made a mistake in coming up from Deauville?”

To save himself Campton could not restrain the sneer; on the rare
occasions when a crisis in their lives flung them on each other’s mercy,
the first sensation he was always conscious of was the degree to which
she bored him. He remembered the day, years ago, long before their
divorce, when it had first come home to him that she was always going to
bore him. But he was ashamed to think of that now, and went on more
patiently: “You see, the situation is rather different from anything
we’ve known before; and, after all, in 1870 all the wise people thought
till the last minute that there would be no war.”

Her delicate face seemed to shrink and wither with apprehension.

“Then?what about George?” she asked, the paint coming out about her
haggard eyes.

Campton paused a moment. “You may suppose I’ve thought of _that_.”

“Oh, of course....” He saw she was honestly trying to be what a mother
should be in talking of her only child to that child’s father. But the
long habit of superficiality made her stammering and inarticulate when
her one deep feeling tried to rise to the surface.

Campton seated himself again, taking care to choose a straight-backed
chair. “I see nothing to worry about with regard to George,” he said.

“You mean???”

“Why, they won’t take him?they won’t want him ... with his medical
record.”

“Are you sure? He’s so much stronger.... He’s gained twenty pounds....”
It was terrible, really, to hear her avow it in a reluctant whisper!
That was the view that war made mothers take of the chief blessing they
could ask for their children! Campton understood her, and took the same
view. George’s wonderful recovery, the one joy his parents had shared in
the last twenty years, was now a misfortune to be denied and dissembled.
They looked at each other like accomplices, the same thought in their
eyes: if only the boy had been born in America! It was grotesque that
the whole of joy or anguish should suddenly be found to hang on a
geographical accident.

“After all, we’re Americans; this is not our job?” Campton began.

“No?” He saw she was waiting, and knew for what.

“So of course?if there were any trouble?but there won’t be; if there
were, though, I shouldn’t hesitate to do what was necessary ... use any
influence....”

“Oh, then we agree!” broke from her in a cry of wonder.

The unconscious irony of the exclamation struck him, and increased his
irritation. He remembered the tone?undefinably compassionate?in which
Dastrey had said: “I perfectly understand a foreigner’s taking that
view”.... But _was_ he a foreigner, Campton asked himself? And what was
the criterion of citizenship, if he, who owed to France everything that
had made life worth while, could regard himself as owing her nothing,
now that for the first time he might have something to give her? Well,
for himself that argument was all right: preposterous as he thought
war?any war?he would have offered himself to France on the instant if
she had had any use for his lame carcass. But he had never bargained to
give her his only son.

Mrs. Brant went on in excited argument.

“Of course you know how careful I always am to do nothing about him
without consulting you; but since you feel about it as _we_ do??” She
blushed under her faint rouge. The “we” had slipped out accidentally,
and Campton, aware of turning hard-lipped and grim, sat waiting for her
to repair the blunder. Through the years of his poverty it had been
impossible not to put up, on occasions, with that odious first person
plural: as long as his wretched inability to make money had made it
necessary that his wife’s second husband should pay for his son’s keep,
such allusions had been part of Campton’s long expiation. But even then
he had tacitly made his former wife understand that, when they had to
talk of the boy, he could bear her saying “I think,” or “Anderson
thinks,” this or that, but not “_we_ think it.” And in the last few
years, since Campton’s unforeseen success had put him, to the
astonishment of every one concerned, in a position of financial
independence, “Anderson” had almost entirely dropped out of their talk
about George’s future. Mrs. Brant was not a clever woman, but she had a
social adroitness that sometimes took the place of intelligence.

On this occasion she saw her mistake so quickly, and blushed for it so
painfully, that at any other time Campton would have smiled away her
distress; but at the moment he could not stir a muscle to help her.

“Look here,” he broke out, “there are things I’ve had to accept in the
past, and shall have to accept in the future. The boy is to go into
Bullard and Brant’s?it’s agreed; I’m not sure enough of being able to
provide for him for the next few years to interfere with?with your plans
in that respect. But I thought it was understood once for all??”

She interrupted him excitedly. “Oh, of course ... of course. You must
admit I’ve always respected your feeling....”

He acknowledged awkwardly: “Yes.”

“Well, then?won’t you see that this situation is different, terribly
different, and that we ought all to work together? If Anderson’s
influence can be of use....”

“Anderson’s influence??” Campton’s gorge rose against the phrase! It was
always Anderson’s influence that had been invoked?and none knew better
than Campton himself how justly?when the boy’s future was under
discussion. But in this particular case the suggestion was intolerable.

“Of course,” he interrupted drily. “But, as it happens, I think I can
attend to this job myself.”

She looked down at her huge rings, hesitated visibly, and then flung
tact to the winds. “What makes you think so? You don’t know the right
sort of people.”

It was a long time since she had thrown that at him: not since the
troubled days of their marriage, when it had been the cruellest taunt
she could think of. Now it struck him simply as a particularly
unpalatable truth. No, he didn’t know “the right sort of people” ...
unless, for instance, among his new patrons, such a man as Jorgenstein
answered to the description. But, if there were war, on what side would
a cosmopolitan like Jorgenstein turn out to be?

“Anderson, you see,” she persisted, losing sight of everything in the
need to lull her fears, “Anderson knows all the political people. In a
business way, of course, a big banker has to. If there’s really any
chance of George’s being taken you’ve no right to refuse Anderson’s
help?none whatever!”

Campton was silent. He had meant to reassure her, to reaffirm his
conviction that the boy was sure to be discharged. But as their eyes met
he saw that she believed this no more than he did; and he felt the
contagion of her incredulity.

“But if you’re so sure there’s not going to be war??” he began.

As he spoke he saw her face change, and was aware that the door behind
him had opened and that a short man, bald and slim, was advancing at a
sort of mincing trot across the pompous garlands of the Savonnerie
carpet. Campton got to his feet. He had expected Anderson Brant to stop
at sight of him, mumble a greeting, and then back out of the room?as
usual. But Anderson Brant did nothing of the sort: he merely hastened
his trot toward the tea-table. He made no attempt to shake hands with
Campton, but bowing shyly and stiffly said: “I understood you were
coming, and hurried back ... on the chance ... to consult....”

Campton gazed at him without speaking. They had not seen each other
since the extraordinary occasion, two years before, when Mr. Brant,
furtively one day at dusk, had come to his studio to offer to buy
George’s portrait; and, as their eyes met, the memory of that visit
reddened both their faces.

Mr. Brant was a compact little man of about sixty. His sandy hair, just
turning grey, was brushed forward over a baldness which was ivory-white
at the crown and became brick-pink above the temples, before merging
into the tanned and freckled surface of his face. He was always dressed
in carefully cut clothes of a discreet grey, with a tie to match, in
which even the plump pearl was grey, so that he reminded Campton of a
dry perpendicular insect in protective tints; and the fancy was
encouraged by his cautious manner, and the way he had of peering over
his glasses as if they were part of his armour. His feet were small and
pointed, and seemed to be made of patent leather; and shaking hands with
him was like clasping a bunch of twigs.

It had been Campton’s lot, on the rare occasions of his meeting Mr.
Brant, always to see this perfectly balanced man in moments of
disequilibrium, when the attempt to simulate poise probably made him
more rigid than nature had created him. But to-day his perturbation
betrayed itself in the gesture with which he drummed out a tune on the
back of the gold and platinum cigar-case he had unconsciously drawn from
his pocket.

After a moment he seemed to become aware of what he had in his hand, and
pressing the sapphire spring held out the case with the remark:
“Coronas.”

Campton made a movement of refusal, and Mr. Brant, overwhelmed, thrust
the cigar-case away.

“I ought to have taken one?I may need him,” Campton thought; and Mrs.
Brant said, addressing her husband: “He thinks as _we_ do?exactly.”

Campton winced. Thinking as the Brants did was, at all times, so foreign
to his nature and his principles that his first impulse was to protest.
But the sight of Mr. Brant, standing there helplessly, and trying to
hide the twitching of his lip by stroking his lavender-scented moustache
with a discreetly curved hand, moved the painter’s imagination.

“Poor devil?he’d give all his millions if the boy were safe,” he
thought, “and he doesn’t even dare to say so.”

It satisfied Campton’s sense of his rights that these two powerful
people were hanging on his decision like frightened children, and he
answered, looking at Mrs. Brant: “There’s nothing to be done at present
... absolutely nothing?? Except,” he added abruptly, “to take care not
to talk in this way to George.”

Mrs. Brant lifted a startled gaze.

“What do you mean? If war is declared, you can’t expect me not to speak
of it to him.”

“Speak of it as much as you like, but don’t drag him in. Let him work
out his own case for himself.”

He went on with an effort: “It’s what I intend to do.”

“But you said you’d use every influence!” she protested, obtusely.

“Well?I believe this is one of them.”

She looked down resignedly at her clasped hands, and he saw her lips
tighten. “My telling her that has been just enough to start her on the
other tack,” he groaned to himself, all her old stupidities rising up
around him like a fog.

Mr. Brant gave a slight cough and removed his protecting hand from his
lips.

“Mr. Campton is right,” he said, quickly and timorously. “I take the
same view?entirely. George must not know that we are thinking of using
... any means....” He coughed again, and groped for the cigar-case.

As he spoke, there came over Campton a sense of their possessing a
common ground of understanding that Campton had never found in his wife.
He had had a hint of the same feeling, but had voluntarily stifled it,
on the day when Mr. Brant, apologetic yet determined, had come to the
studio to buy George’s portrait. Campton had seen then how the man
suffered from his failure, but had chosen to attribute his distress to
the humiliation of finding there were things his money could not
purchase. Now, that judgment seemed as unimaginative as he had once
thought Mr. Brant’s overture. Campton turned on the banker a look that
was almost brotherly.

“We men know ...” the look said; and Mr. Brant’s parched cheek was
suffused with a flush of understanding. Then, as if frightened at the
consequences of such complicity, he repeated his bow and went out.

When Campton issued forth into the Avenue Marigny, it came to him as a
surprise to see the old unheeding life of Paris still going on. In the
golden decline of day the usual throng of idlers sat under the
horse-chestnuts of the Champs Elysees, children scampered between turf
and flowers, and the perpetual stream of motors rolled-up the central
avenue to the restaurants beyond the gates.

Under the last trees of the Avenue Gabriel the painter stood looking
across the Place de la Concorde. No doubt the future was dark: he had
guessed from Mr. Brant’s precipitate arrival that the banks and the
Stock Exchange feared the worst. But what could a man do, whose
convictions were so largely formed by the play of things on his retina,
when, in the setting sun, all that majesty of space and light and
architecture was spread out before him undisturbed? Paris was too
triumphant a fact not to argue down his fears. There she lay in the
security of her beauty, and once more proclaimed herself eternal.




                                  III


The night was so lovely that, though the Boulogne express arrived late,
George at once proposed dining in the Bois.

His luggage, of which, as usual, there was a good deal, was dropped at
the Crillon, and they shot up the Champs Elysees as the summer dusk
began to be pricked by lamps.

“How jolly the old place smells!” George cried, breathing in the scent
of sun-warmed asphalt, of flowerbeds and freshly-watered dust. He seemed
as much alive to such impressions as if his first word at the station
had not been: “Well, this time I suppose we’re in for it.” In for it
they might be; but meanwhile he meant to enjoy the scents and scenes of
Paris as acutely and unconcernedly as ever.

Campton had hoped that he would pick out one of the humble cyclists’
restaurants near the Seine; but not he. “Madrid, is it?” he said gaily,
as the taxi turned into the Bois; and there they sat under the
illuminated trees, in the general glitter and expensiveness, with the
Tziganes playing down their talk, and all around them the painted faces
that seemed to the father so old and obvious, and to the son, no doubt,
so full of novelty and mystery.

The music made conversation difficult; but Campton did not care. It was
enough to sit and watch the face in which, after each absence, he noted
a new and richer vivacity. He had often tried to make up his mind if his
boy were handsome. Not that the father’s eye influenced the painter’s;
but George’s young head, with its thick blond thatch, the complexion
ruddy to the golden eyebrows, and then abruptly white on the forehead,
the short amused nose, the inquisitive eyes, the ears lying back flat to
the skull against curly edges of fair hair, defied all rules and escaped
all classifications by a mixture of romantic gaiety and shrewd plainness
like that in certain eighteenth-century portraits.

As father and son faced each other over the piled-up peaches, while the
last sparkle of champagne died down in their glasses, Campton’s thoughts
went back to the day when he had first discovered his son. George was a
schoolboy of twelve, at home for the Christmas holidays. At home meant
at the Brants’, since it was always there he stayed: his father saw him
only on certain days. Usually Mariette fetched him to the studio on one
afternoon in the week; but this particular week George was ill, and it
had been arranged that in case of illness his father was to visit him at
his mother’s. He had one of his frequent bad colds, and Campton recalled
him, propped up in bed in his luxurious overheated room, a scarlet
sweater over his nightshirt, a book on his thin knees, and his ugly
little fever-flushed face bent over it in profound absorption. Till that
moment George had never seemed to care for books: his father had
resigned himself to the probability of seeing him grow up into the
ordinary pleasant young fellow, with his mother’s worldly tastes. But
the boy was reading as only a bookworm reads?reading with his very
finger-tips, and his inquisitive nose, and the perpetual dart ahead of a
gaze that seemed to guess each phrase from its last word. He looked up
with a smile, and said: “Oh, Dad ...” but it was clear that he regarded
the visit as an interruption. Campton, leaning over, saw that the book
was a first edition of Lavengro.

“Where the deuce did you get that?”

George looked at him with shining eyes. “Didn’t you know? Mr. Brant has
started collecting first editions. There’s a chap who comes over from
London with things for him. He lets me have them to look at when I’m
seedy. I say, isn’t this topping? Do you remember the fight?” And,
marvelling once more at the ways of Providence, Campton perceived that
the millionaire’s taste for owning books had awakened in his stepson a
taste for reading them. “I couldn’t have done that for him,” the father
had reflected with secret bitterness. It was not that a bibliophile’s
library was necessary to develop a taste for letters; but that Campton
himself, being a small reader, had few books about him, and usually
borrowed those few. If George had lived with him he might never have
guessed the boy’s latent hunger, for the need of books as part of one’s
daily food would scarcely have presented itself to him.

From that day he and George had understood each other. Initiation had
come to them in different ways, but their ardour for beauty had the same
root. The visible world, and its transposition in terms of one art or
another, were thereafter the subject of their interminable talks; and
Campton, with a passionate interest, watched his son absorbing through
books what had mysteriously reached him through his paintbrush.

They had been parted often, and for long periods; first by George’s
schooling in England, next by his French military service, begun at
eighteen to facilitate his entry into Harvard; finally, by his sojourn
at the University. But whenever they were together they seemed to make
up in the first ten minutes for the longest separation; and since George
had come of age, and been his own master, he had given his father every
moment he could spare.

His career at Harvard had been interrupted, after two years, by the
symptoms of tuberculosis which had necessitated his being hurried off to
the Engadine. He had returned completely cured, and at his own wish had
gone back to Harvard; and having finished his course and taken his
degree, he had now come out to join his father on a long holiday before
entering the New York banking-house of Bullard and Brant.

Campton, looking at the boy’s bright head across the lights and flowers,
thought how incredibly stupid it was to sacrifice an hour of such a life
to the routine of money-getting; but he had had that question out with
himself once for all, and was not going to return to it. His own
success, if it lasted, would eventually help him to make George
independent; but meanwhile he had no right to interfere with the boy’s
business training. He had hoped that George would develop some marked
talent, some irresistible tendency which would decide his future too
definitely for interference; but George was twenty-five, and no such
call had come to him. Apparently he was fated to be only a delighted
spectator and commentator; to enjoy and interpret, not to create. And
Campton knew that this absence of a special bent, with the strain and
absorption it implies, gave the boy his peculiar charm. The trouble was
that it made him the prey of other people’s plans for him. And now all
these plans?Campton’s dreams for the future as well as the business
arrangements which were Mr. Brant’s contribution?might be wrecked by
to-morrow’s news from Berlin. The possibility still seemed unthinkable;
but in spite of his incredulity the evil shadow hung on him as he and
his son chatted of political issues.

George made no allusion to his own case: his whole attitude was so
dispassionate that his father began to wonder if he had not solved the
question by concluding that he would not pass the medical examination.
The tone he took was that the whole affair, from the point of view of
twentieth-century civilization, was too monstrous an incongruity for
something not to put a stop to it at the eleventh hour. His easy
optimism at first stimulated his father, and then began to jar on him.

“Dastrey doesn’t think it can be stopped,” Campton said at length.

The boy smiled.

“Dear old Dastrey! No, I suppose not. That after-Sedan generation have
got the inevitability of war in their bones. They’ve never been able to
get beyond it. _Our_ whole view is different: we’re internationals,
whether we want to be or not.”

“To begin with, if by ‘our’ view you mean yours and mine, you and I
haven’t a drop of French blood in us,” his father interposed, “and we
can never really know what the French feel on such matters.”

George looked at him affectionately. “Oh, but I didn’t?I meant ‘we’ in
the sense of my generation, of whatever nationality. I know French chaps
who feel as I do?Louis Dastrey, Paul’s nephew, for one; and lots of
English ones. They don’t believe the world will ever stand for another
war. It’s too stupidly uneconomic, to begin with: I suppose you’ve read
Angell? Then life’s worth too much, and nowadays too many millions of
people know it. That’s the way we all feel. Think of everything that
counts?art and science and poetry, and all the rest?going to smash at
the nod of some doddering diplomatist! It was different in old times,
when the best of life, for the immense majority, was never anything but
plague, pestilence and famine. People are too healthy and well-fed now;
they’re not going off to die in a ditch to oblige anybody.”

Campton looked away, and his eye, straying over the crowd, lit on the
long heavy face of Fortin-Lescluze, seated with a group of men on the
other side of the garden.

Why had it never occurred to him before that if there was one being in
the world who could get George discharged it was the great specialist
under whose care he had been?

“Suppose war does come,” the father thought, “what if I were to go over
and tell him I’ll paint his dancer?” He stood up and made his way
between the tables.

Fortin-Lescluze was dining with a party of jaded-looking politicians and
journalists. To reach him Campton had to squeeze past another table, at
which a fair worn-looking lady sat beside a handsome old man with a
dazzling mane of white hair and a Grand Officer’s rosette of the Legion
of Honour. Campton bowed, and the lady whispered something to her
companion, who returned a stately vacant salute. Poor old Beausite,
dining alone with his much-wronged and all-forgiving wife, bowing to the
people she told him to bow to, and placidly murmuring: “War?war,” as he
stuck his fork into the peach she had peeled!

At Fortin’s table the faces were less placid. The men greeted Campton
with a deference which was not lost on Mme. Beausite, and the painter
bent close over Fortin, embarrassed at the idea that she might overhear
him. “If I can make time for a sketch?will you bring your dancing lady
to-morrow?”

The physician’s eyes lit up under their puffy lids.

“My dear friend?will I? She’s simply set her heart on it!” He drew out
his watch and added: “But why not tell her the good news yourself? You
told me, I think, you’d never seen her? This is her last night at the
‘Posada,’ and if you’ll jump into my motor we shall be just in time to
see her come on.”

Campton beckoned to George, and father and son followed Fortin-Lescluze.
None of the three men, on the way back to Paris, made any reference to
the war. The physician asked George a few medical questions, and
complimented him on his look of recovered health; then the talk strayed
to studios and theatres, where Fortin-Lescluze firmly kept it.

The last faint rumours of the conflict died out on the threshold of the
“Posada.” It would have been hard to discern, in the crowded audience,
any appearance but that of ordinary pleasure-seekers momentarily stirred
by a new sensation. Collectively, fashionable Paris was already away, at
the seashore or in the mountains, but not a few of its chief ornaments
still lingered, as the procession through Campton’s studio had proved;
and others had returned drawn back by doubts about the future, the
desire to be nearer the source of news, the irresistible French craving
for the forum and the market when messengers are foaming in. The public
of the “Posada,” therefore, was still Parisian enough to flatter the new
dancer; and on all the pleasure-tired faces, belonging to every type of
money-getters and amusement-seekers, Campton saw only the old familiar
music-hall look: the look of a house with lights blazing and windows
wide, but nobody and nothing within.

The usualness of it all gave him a sense of ease which his boy’s
enjoyment confirmed. George, lounging on the edge of their box, and
watching the yellow dancer with a clear-eyed interest refreshingly
different from Fortin’s tarnished gaze, George so fresh and cool and
unafraid, seemed to prove that a world which could produce such youths
would never again settle its differences by the bloody madness of war.

Gradually Campton became absorbed in the dancer and began to observe her
with the concentration he brought to bear on any subject that attracted
his brush. He saw that she was more paintable than he could have hoped,
though not in the extravagant dress and attitude he was sure her eminent
admirer would prefer; but rather as a little crouching animal against a
sun-baked wall. He smiled at the struggle he should have when the
question of costume came up.

“Well, I’ll do her, if you like,” he turned to say; and two tears of
senile triumph glittered on the physician’s cheeks.

“To-morrow, then?at two?may I bring her? She leaves as soon as possible
for the south. She lives on sun, heat, radiance....”

“To-morrow?yes,” Campton nodded.

His decision once reached, the whole subject bored him, and in spite of
Fortin’s entreaties he got up and signalled to George.

As they strolled home through the brilliant midnight streets, the boy
said: “Did I hear you tell old Fortin you were going to do his dancer?”

“Yes?why not? She’s very paintable,” said Campton, abruptly shaken out
of his security.

“Beginning to-morrow?”

“Why not?”

“Come, you know?_to-morrow_!” George laughed.

“We’ll see,” his father rejoined, with an obscure sense that if he went
on steadily enough doing his usual job it might somehow divert the
current of events.

On the threshold of the hotel they were waylaid by an elderly man with a
round face and round eyes behind gold eye-glasses. His grey hair was cut
in a fringe over his guileless forehead, and he was dressed in expensive
evening clothes, and shone with soap and shaving; but the anxiety of a
frightened child puckered his innocent brow and twitching cheeks.

“My dear Campton?the very man I’ve been hunting for! You remember
me?your cousin Harvey Mayhew of Utica?”

Campton, with an effort, remembered, and asked what he could do,
inwardly hoping it was not a portrait.

“Oh, the simplest thing in the world. You see, I’m here as a Delegate??”
At Campton’s look of enquiry, Mr. Mayhew interrupted himself to explain:
“To the Peace Congress at The Hague??why, yes: naturally. I landed only
this morning, and find myself in the middle of all this rather foolish
excitement, and unable to make out just how I can reach my destination.
My time is?er?valuable, and it is very unfortunate that all this
commotion should be allowed to interfere with our work. It would be most
annoying if, after having made the effort to break away from Utica, I
should arrive too late for the opening of the Congress.”

Campton looked at him wonderingly. “Then you’re going anyhow?”

“Going? Why not? You surely don’t think???” Mr. Mayhew threw back his
shoulders, pink and impressive. “I shouldn’t, in any case, allow
anything so opposed to my convictions as _war_ to interfere with my
carrying out my mandate. All I want is to find out the route least
likely to be closed if?if this monstrous thing should happen.”

Campton considered. “Well, if I were you, I should go round by
Luxembourg?it’s longer, but you’ll be out of the way of trouble.” He
gave a nod of encouragement, and the Peace Delegate thanked him
profusely.

Father and son were lodged on the top floor of the Crillon, in the
little apartment which opens on the broad terraced roof. Campton had
wanted to put before his boy one of the city’s most perfect scenes; and
when they reached their sitting-room George went straight out onto the
terrace, and leaning on the parapet, called back: “Oh, don’t go to bed
yet?it’s too jolly.”

Campton followed, and the two stood looking down on the festal expanse
of the Place de la Concorde strown with great flower-clusters of lights
between its pearly distances. The sky was full of stars, pale, remote,
half-drowned in the city’s vast illumination; and the foliage of the
Champs Elysees and the Tuileries made masses of mysterious darkness
behind the statues and the flashing fountains.

For a long time neither father nor son spoke; then Campton said: “Are
you game to start the day after to-morrow?”

George waited a moment. “For Africa?”

“Well?my idea would be to push straight through to the south?as far as
Palermo, say. All this cloudy watery loveliness gives me a furious
appetite for violent red earth and white houses crackling in the glare.”

George again pondered; then he said: “It sounds first-rate. But if
you’re so sure we’re going to start why did you tell Fortin to bring
that girl to-morrow?”

Campton, reddening in the darkness, felt as if his son’s clear eyes were
following the motions of his blood. Had George suspected why he had
wanted to ingratiate himself with the physician?

“It was stupid?I’ll put her off,” he muttered. He dropped into an
armchair, and sat there, in his clumsy infirm attitude, his arms folded
behind his head, while George continued to lean on the parapet.

The boy’s question had put an end to their talk by baring the throbbing
nerve of his father’s anxiety. If war were declared the next day, what
did George mean to do? There was every hope of his obtaining his
discharge; but would he lend himself to the attempt? The deadly fear of
crystallizing his son’s refusal by forcing him to put it into words kept
Campton from asking the question.




                                   IV


The evening was too beautiful, and too full of the sense of fate, for
sleep to be possible, and long after George had finally said “All the
same, I think I’ll turn in,” his father sat on, listening to the gradual
subsidence of the traffic, and watching the night widen above Paris.

As he sat there, discouragement overcame him. His last plan, his plan
for getting George finally and completely over to his side, was going to
fail as all his other plans had failed. If there were war there would be
no more portraits to paint, and his vision of wealth would vanish as
visions of love and happiness and comradeship had one by one faded away.
Nothing had ever succeeded with him but the thing he had in some moods
set least store by, the dogged achievement of his brush; and just as
that was about to assure his happiness, here was this horrible
world-catastrophe threatening to fall across his path.

His misfortune had been that he could neither get on easily with people
nor live without them; could never wholly isolate himself in his art,
nor yet resign himself to any permanent human communion that left it
out, or, worse still, dragged it in irrelevantly. He had tried both
kinds, and on the whole preferred the first. His marriage, his stupid
ill-fated marriage, had after all not been the most disenchanting of his
adventures, because Julia Ambrose, when she married him, had made no
pretense of espousing his art.

He had seen her first in the tumble-down Venetian palace where she lived
with her bachelor uncle, old Horace Ambrose, who dabbled in bric-a-brac
and cultivated a guileless Bohemianism. Campton, looking back, could
still understand why, to a youth fresh from Utica, at odds with his
father, unwilling to go into the family business, and strangling with
violent unexpressed ideas on art and the universe, marriage with Julia
Ambrose had seemed so perfect a solution. She had been brought up abroad
by her parents, a drifting and impecunious American couple; and after
their deaths, within a few months of each other, her education had been
completed, at her uncle’s expense, in a fashionable Parisian convent.
Thence she had been transplanted at nineteen to his Venetian household,
and all the ideas that most terrified and scandalized Campton’s family
were part of the only air she had breathed. She had never intentionally
feigned an exaggerated interest in his ambitions. But her bringing-up
made her regard them as natural; she knew what he was aiming at, though
she had never understood his reasons for trying. The jargon of art was
merely one of her many languages; but she talked it so fluently that he
had taken it for her mother-tongue.

The only other girls he had known well were his sisters?earnest
eye-glassed young women, whose one answer to all his problems was that
he ought to come home. The idea of Europe had always been terrifying to
them, and indeed to his whole family, since the extraordinary
misadventure whereby, as the result of a protracted diligence journey
over bad roads, of a violent thunderstorm, and a delayed steamer,
Campton had been born in Paris instead of Utica. Mrs. Campton the elder
had taken the warning to heart, and never again left her native soil;
but the sisters, safely and properly brought into the world in their own
city and State, had always felt that Campton’s persistent yearnings for
Europe, and his inexplicable detachment from Utica and the Mangle, were
mysteriously due to the accident of their mother’s premature
confinement.

Compared with the admonitions of these domestic censors, Miss Ambrose’s
innocent conversation was as seductive as the tangles of Neæra’s hair,
and it used to be a joke between them (one of the few he had ever been
able to make her see) that he, the raw up-Stater, was Parisian born,
while she, the glass and pattern of worldly knowledge, had seen the
light in the pure atmosphere of Madison Avenue.

Through her, in due course, he came to know another girl, a queer abrupt
young American, already an old maid at twenty-two, and in open revolt
against her family for reasons not unlike his own. Adele Anthony had
come abroad to keep house for a worthless “artistic” brother, who was
preparing to be a sculptor by prolonged sessions in Anglo-American bars
and the lobbies of music-halls. When he finally went under, and was
shipped home, Miss Anthony stayed on in Paris, ashamed, as she told
Campton, to go back and face the righteous triumph of a family
connection who had unanimously disbelieved in the possibility of making
Bill Anthony into a sculptor, and in the wisdom of his sister’s staking
her small means on the venture.

“Somehow, behind it all, I was right, and they were wrong; but to do
anything with poor Bill I ought to have been able to begin two or three
generations back,” she confessed.

Miss Anthony had many friends in Paris, of whom Julia Ambrose was the
most admired; and she had assisted sympathizingly (if not
enthusiastically) at Campton’s wooing of Julia, and their hasty
marriage. Her only note of warning had been the reminder that Julia had
always been poor, and had always lived as if she were rich; and that was
silenced by Campton’s rejoinder that the Magic Mangle, to which the
Campton prosperity was due, was some day going to make him rich, though
he had always lived as if he were poor.

“Well?you’d better not, any longer,” Adele sharply advised; and he
laughed, and promised to go out and buy a new hat. In truth, careless of
comfort as he was, he adored luxury in women, and was resolved to let
his wife ruin him if she did it handsomely enough. Doubtless she might
have, had fate given her time; but soon after their marriage old Mr.
Campton died, and it was found that a trusted manager had so invested
the profits of the Mangle that the heirs inherited only a series of
law-suits.

John Campton, henceforth, was merely the unsuccessful son of a ruined
manufacturer; painting became a luxury he could no longer afford, and
his mother and sisters besought him to come back and take over what was
left of the business. It seemed so clearly his duty that, with anguish
of soul, he prepared to go; but Julia, on being consulted, developed a
sudden passion for art and poverty.

“We’d have to live in Utica?for some years at any rate?”

“Well, yes, no doubt??” They faced the fact desolately.

“They’d much better look out for another manager. What do you know about
business? Since you’ve taken up painting you’d better try to make a
success of that,” she advised him; and he was too much of the same mind
not to agree.

It was not long before George’s birth, and they were fully resolved to
go home for the event, and thus spare their hoped for heir the
inconvenience of coming into the world, like his father, in a foreign
country. But now this was not to be thought of, and the eventual
inconvenience to George was lost sight of by his progenitors in the
contemplation of nearer problems.

For a few years their life dragged along shabbily and depressingly. Now
that Campton’s painting was no longer an amateur’s hobby but a domestic
obligation, Julia thought it her duty to interest herself in it; and her
only idea of doing so was by means of what she called “relations,” using
the word in its French and diplomatic sense.

She was convinced that her husband’s lack of success was due to
Beausite’s blighting epigram, and to Campton’s subsequent resolve to
strike out for himself. “It’s a great mistake to try to be original till
people have got used to you,” she said, with the shrewdness that
sometimes startled him. “If you’d only been civil to Beausite he would
have ended by taking you up, and then you could have painted as queerly
as you liked.”

Beausite, by this time, had succumbed to the honours which lie in wait
for such talents, and in his starred and titled maturity his earlier
dread of rivals had given way to a prudent benevolence. Young artists
were always welcome at the receptions he gave in his sumptuous hotel of
the Avenue du Bois. Those who threatened to be rivals were even invited
to dine; and Julia was justified in triumphing when such an invitation
finally rewarded her efforts.

Campton, with a laugh, threw the card into the stove.

“If you’d only understand that that’s not the way,” he said.

“What is, then?”

“Why, letting all that lot see what unutterable rubbish one thinks
them!”

“I should have thought you’d tried that long enough,” she said with pale
lips; but he answered jovially that it never palled on him.

She was bitterly offended; but she knew Campton by this time, and was
not a woman to waste herself in vain resentment. She simply suggested
that since he would not profit by Beausite’s advance the only
alternative was to try to get orders for portraits; and though at that
stage he was not in the mood for portrait-painting, he made an honest
attempt to satisfy her. She began, of course, by sitting for him. She
sat again and again; but, lovely as she was, he was not inspired, and
one day, in sheer self-defence, he blurted out that she was not
paintable. She never forgot the epithet, and it loomed large in their
subsequent recriminations.

Adele Anthony?it was just like her?gave him his first order, and she did
prove paintable. Campton made a success of her long crooked pink-nosed
face; but she didn’t perceive it (she had wanted something oval, with
tulle, and a rose in a taper hand), and after heroically facing the
picture for six months she hid it away in an attic, whence, a year or so
before the date of the artist’s present musings, it had been fished out
as an “early Campton,” to be exhibited half a dozen times, and have
articles written about it in the leading art reviews.

Adele’s picture acted as an awful warning to intending patrons,
and after one or two attempts at depicting mistrustful friends
Campton refused to constrain his muse, and no more was said of
portrait-painting. But life in Paris was growing too expensive. He
persuaded Julia to try Spain, and they wandered about there for a
year. She was not fault-finding, she did not complain, but she
hated travelling, she could not eat things cooked in oil, and his
pictures seemed to her to be growing more and more ugly and
unsalable.

Finally they came one day to Ronda, after a trying sojourn at Cordova.
In the train Julia had moaned a little at the mosquitoes of the previous
night, and at the heat and dirt of the second-class compartment; then,
always conscious of the ill-breeding of fretfulness, she had bent her
lovely head above her Tauchnitz. And it was then that Campton, looking
out of the window to avoid her fatally familiar profile, had suddenly
discovered another. It was that of a peasant girl in front of a small
whitewashed house, under a white pergola hung with bunches of big red
peppers. The house, which was close to the railway, was propped against
an orange-coloured rock, and in the glare cast up from the red earth its
walls looked as blue as snow in shadow. The girl was all blue-white too,
from her cotton skirt to the kerchief knotted turban-wise above two
folds of blue-black hair. Her round forehead and merry nose were
relieved like a bronze medallion against the wall; and she stood with
her hands on her hips, laughing at a little pig asleep under a
cork-tree, who lay on his side like a dog.

The vision filled the carriage-window and then vanished; but it remained
so sharply impressed on Campton that even then he knew what was going to
happen. He leaned back with a sense of relief, and forgot everything
else.

The next morning he said to his wife: “There’s a little place up the
line that I want to go back and paint. You don’t mind staying here a day
or two, do you?”

She said she did not mind; it was what she always said; but he was
somehow aware that this was the particular grievance she had always been
waiting for. He did not care for that, or for anything but getting a
seat in the diligence which started every morning for the village
nearest the white house. On the way he remembered that he had left Julia
only forty pesetas, but he did not care about that either.... He stayed
a month, and when he returned to Ronda his wife had gone back to Paris,
leaving a letter to say that the matter was in the hands of her lawyers.

“What did you do it for?I mean in that particular way? For goodness
knows I understand all the rest,” Adele Anthony had once asked him,
while the divorce proceedings were going on; and he had shaken his head,
conscious that he could not explain.

It was a year or two later that he met the first person who _did_
understand: a Russian lady who had heard the story, was curious to know
him, and asked, one day, when their friendship had progressed, to see
the sketches he had brought back from his _fugue_.

“_Comme je vous comprends!_” she had murmured, her grey eyes deep in
his; but perceiving that she did not allude to the sketches, but to his
sentimental adventure, Campton pushed the drawings out of sight, vexed
with himself for having shown them.

He forgave the Russian lady her artistic obtuseness for the sake of her
human comprehension. They had met at the loneliest moment of his life,
when his art seemed to have failed him like everything else, and when
the struggle to get possession of his son, which had been going on in
the courts ever since the break with Julia, had finally been decided
against him. His Russian friend consoled, amused and agitated him, and
after a few years drifted out of his life as irresponsibly as she had
drifted into it; and he found himself, at forty-five, a lonely thwarted
man, as full as ever of faith in his own powers, but with little left in
human nature or in opportunity. It was about this time that he heard
that Julia was to marry again, and that his boy would have a stepfather.

He knew that even his own family thought it “the best thing that could
happen.” They were tired of clubbing together to pay Julia’s alimony,
and heaved a united sigh of relief when they learned that her second
choice had fallen, not on the bankrupt “foreign Count” they had always
dreaded, but on the Paris partner of the famous bank of Bullard and
Brant. Mr. Brant’s request that his wife’s alimony should be
discontinued gave him a moral superiority which even Campton’s recent
successes could not shake. It was felt that the request expressed the
contempt of an income easily counted in seven figures for a pittance
painfully screwed up to four; and the Camptons admired Mr. Brant much
more for not needing their money than for refusing it.

Their attitude left John Campton without support in his struggle to keep
a hold on his boy. His family sincerely thought George safer with the
Brants than with his own father, and the father could advance to the
contrary no arguments they would have understood. All the forces of
order seemed leagued against him; and it was perhaps this fact that
suddenly drove him into conformity with them. At any rate, from the day
of Julia’s remarriage no other woman shared her former husband’s life.
Campton settled down to the solitude of his dusty studio at Montmartre,
and painted doggedly, all his thoughts on George.

                  *       *       *       *       *

At this point in his reminiscences the bells of Sainte Clotilde rang out
the half-hour after midnight, and Campton rose and went into the
darkened sitting-room.

The door into George’s room was open, and in the silence the father
heard the boy’s calm breathing. A light from the bathroom cast its ray
on the dressing-table, which was scattered with the contents of George’s
pockets. Campton, dwelling with a new tenderness on everything that
belonged to his son, noticed a smart antelope card-case (George had his
mother’s weakness for Bond Street novelties), a wrist-watch, his studs,
a bundle of bank-notes; and beside these a thumbed and dirty red book,
the size of a large pocket-diary.

The father wondered what it was; then of a sudden he knew. He had once
seen Mme. Lebel’s grandson pull just such a red book from his pocket as
he was leaving for his “twenty-eight days” of military service; it was
the _livret militaire_ that every French citizen under forty-eight
carries about with him.

Campton had never paid much attention to French military regulations:
George’s service over, he had dismissed the matter from his mind,
forgetting that his son was still a member of the French army, and as
closely linked to the fortunes of France as the grandson of the
concierge of Montmartre. Now it occurred to him that that little red
book would answer the questions he had not dared to put; and stealing
in, he possessed himself of it and carried it back to the sitting-room.
There he sat down by the lamp and read.

First George’s name, his domicile, his rank as a _marechal des logis_ of
dragoons, the number of his regiment and its base: all that was already
familiar. But what was this on the next page?

“In case of general mobilisation announced to the populations of France
by public proclamations, or by notices posted in the streets, the bearer
of this order is to rejoin his regiment at ??.

“He is to take with him provisions for one day.

“He is to present himself at the station of ?? on the third day of
mobilisation at 6 o’clock, and to take the train indicated by the
station-master.

“The days of mobilisation are counted from 0 o’clock to 24 o’clock. The
first day is that on which the order of mobilisation is published.”

Campton dropped the book and pressed his hands to his temples. “The days
of mobilisation are counted from 0 o’clock to 24 o’clock. The first day
is that on which the order of mobilisation is published.” Then, if
France mobilised that day, George would start the second day after, at
six in the morning. George might be going to leave him within
forty-eight hours from that very moment!

Campton had always vaguely supposed that, some day or other, if war
came, a telegram would call George to his base; it had never occurred to
him that every detail of the boy’s military life had long since been
regulated by the dread power which had him in its grasp.

He read the next paragraph: “The bearer will travel free of charge??”
and thought with a grin how it would annoy Anderson Brant that the
French government should presume to treat his stepson as if he could not
pay his way. The plump bundle of bank-notes on the dressing-table seemed
to look with ineffectual scorn at the red book that sojourned so
democratically in the same pocket. And Campton, picturing George jammed
into an overcrowded military train, on the plebeian wooden seat of a
third-class compartment, grinned again, forgetful of his own anxiety in
the vision of Brant’s exasperation.

Ah, well, it wasn’t war yet, whatever they said!

He carried the red book back to the dressing-table. The light falling
across the bed drew his eye to the young face on the pillow. George lay
on his side, one arm above his head, the other laxly stretched along the
bed. He had thrown off the blankets, and the sheet, clinging to his
body, modelled his slim flank and legs as he lay in dreamless rest.

For a long time Campton stood gazing; then he stole back to the
sitting-room, picked up a sketch-book and pencil and returned. He knew
there was no danger of waking George, and he began to draw, eagerly but
deliberately, fascinated by the happy accident of the lighting, and of
the boy’s position.

“Like a statue of a young knight I’ve seen somewhere,” he said to
himself, vexed and surprised that he, whose plastic memories were always
so precise, should not remember where; and then his pencil stopped. What
he had really thought was: “Like the _effigy_ of a young knight”?though
he had instinctively changed the word as it formed itself. He leaned in
the doorway, the sketch-book in hand, and continued to gaze at his son.
It was the clinging sheet, no doubt, that gave him that look ... and the
white glare of the electric burner.

If war came, that was just the way a boy might lie on a battle-field-or
afterward in a hospital bed. Not _his_ boy, thank heaven; but very
probably his boy’s friends: hundreds and thousands of boys like his boy,
the age of his boy, with a laugh like his boy’s.... The wicked waste of
it! Well, that was what war meant ... what to-morrow might bring to
millions of parents like himself.

He stiffened his shoulders, and opened the sketch-book again. What
watery stuff was he made of, he wondered? Just because the boy lay as if
he were posing for a tombstone!... What of Signorelli, who had sat at
his dead son’s side and drawn him, tenderly, minutely, while the coffin
waited?

Well, damn Signorelli?that was all! Campton threw down his book, turned
out the sitting-room lights, and limped away to bed.




                                   V


The next morning he said to George, over coffee on the terrace: “I think
I’ll drop in at Cook’s about our tickets.”

George nodded, munching his golden roll.

“Right. I’ll run up to see mother, then.”

His father was silent. Inwardly he was saying to himself: “The chances
are she’ll be going back to Deauville this afternoon.”

There had not been much to gather from the newspapers heaped at their
feet. Austria had ordered general mobilisation; but while the tone of
the despatches was nervous and contradictory that of the leading
articles remained almost ominously reassuring. Campton absorbed the
reassurance without heeding its quality: it was a drug he had to have at
any price.

He expected the Javanese dancer to sit to him that afternoon, but he had
not proposed to George to be present. On the chance that things might
eventually take a wrong turn he meant to say a word to Fortin-Lescluze;
and the presence of his son would have been embarrassing.

“You’ll be back for lunch?” he called to George, who still lounged on
the terrace in pyjamas.

“Rather.?That is, unless mother makes a point ... in case she’s
leaving.”

“Oh, of course,” said Campton with grim cordiality.

“You see, dear old boy, I’ve got to see Uncle Andy some time....” It was
the grotesque name that George, in his babyhood, had given to Mr. Brant,
and when he grew up it had been difficult to substitute another.
“Especially now??” George added, pulling himself up out of his chair.

“Now?”

They looked at each other in silence, irritation in the father’s eye,
indulgent amusement in the son’s.

“Why, if you and I are really off on this long trek??”

“Oh, of course,” agreed Campton, relieved. “You’d much better lunch with
them. I always want you to do what’s decent.” He paused on the threshold
to add: “By the way, don’t forget Adele.”

“Well, rather not,” his son responded. “And we’ll keep the evening free
for something awful.”

As he left the room he heard George rapping on the telephone and calling
out Miss Anthony’s number.

Campton had to have reassurance at any price; and he got it, as usual,
irrationally but irresistibly, through his eyes. The mere fact that the
midsummer sun lay so tenderly on Paris, that the bronze dolphins of the
fountains in the square were spraying the Nereids’ Louis Philippe
chignons as playfully as ever; that the sleepy Cities of France dozed as
heavily on their thrones, and the Horses of Marly pranced as fractiously
on their pedestals; that the glorious central setting of the city lay
there in its usual mellow pomp?all this gave him a sense of security
that no crisscrossing of Reuters and Havases could shake.

Nevertheless, he reflected that there was no use in battling with the
silly hysterical crowd he would be sure to encounter at Cook’s; and
having left word with the hotel-porter to secure two “sleepings” on the
Naples express, he drove to the studio.

On the way, as his habit was, he thought hard of his model: everything
else disappeared like a rolled-up curtain, and his inner vision centred
itself on the little yellow face he was to paint.

Peering through her cobwebby window, he saw old Mme. Lebel on the watch.
He knew she wanted to pounce out and ask if there would be war; and
composing his most taciturn countenance he gave her a preoccupied nod
and hurried by.

The studio looked grimy and disordered, and he remembered that he had
intended, the evening before, to come back and set it to rights. In
pursuance of this plan, he got out a canvas, fussed with his brushes and
colours, and then tried once more to make the place tidy. But his
attempts at order always resulted in worse confusion; the fact had been
one of Julia’s grievances against him, and he had often thought that a
reaction from his ways probably explained the lifeless neatness of the
Anderson Brant drawing-room.

Campton had fled to Montmartre to escape a number of things: first of
all, the possibility of meeting people who would want to talk about the
European situation, then of being called up by Mrs. Brant, and lastly of
having to lunch alone in a fashionable restaurant. In his morbid dread
of seeing people he would have preferred an omelette in the studio, if
only Mariette had been at hand to make it; and he decided, after a vain
struggle with his muddled “properties,” to cross over to the Luxembourg
quarter and pick up a meal in a wine-shop.

He did not own to himself his secret reason for this decision; but it
caused him, after a glance at his watch, to hasten his steps down the
rue Montmartre and bribe a passing taxi to carry him to the Museum of
the Luxembourg. He reached it ten minutes before the midday closing, and
hastening past the serried statues, turned into a room half-way down the
gallery. Whistler’s Mother and the Carmencita of Sargent wondered at
each other from its walls; and on the same wall with the Whistler hung
the picture Campton had come for: his portrait of his son. He had given
it to the Luxembourg the day after Mr. Brant had tried to buy it, with
the object of inflicting the most cruel slight he could think of on the
banker.

In the generous summer light the picture shone out on him with a
communicative warmth: never had he seen so far into its depths. “No
wonder,” he thought, “it opened people’s eyes to what I was trying for.”

He stood and stared his own eyes full, mentally comparing the features
before him with those of the firmer harder George he had left on the
terrace of the Crillon, and noting how time, while fulfilling the rich
promise of the younger face, had yet taken something from its
brightness.

Campton, at that moment, found more satisfaction than ever in thinking
how it must have humiliated Brant to have the picture given to France.
“He could have understood my keeping it myself?or holding it for a
bigger price?but _giving it_??!” The satisfaction was worth the
sacrifice of the best record he would ever have of that phase of his
son’s youth. At various times afterward he had tried for the same
George, but not one of his later studies had that magic light on it.
Still, he was glad he had given the picture. It was safe, safer than it
would have been with him. His great dread had always been that if his
will were mislaid (and his things were always getting mislaid) the
picture might be sold, and fall into Brant’s hands after his death.

The closing signal drove him out of the Museum, and he turned into the
first wine-shop. He had advised George to lunch with the Brants, but
there was disappointment in his heart. Seeing the turn things were
taking, he had hoped the boy would feel the impulse to remain with him.
But, after all, at such a time a son could not refuse to go to his
mother. Campton pictured the little party of three grouped about the
luncheon-table in the high cool dining-room of the Avenue Marigny, with
the famous Hubert Robert panels, and the Louis XV silver and Sevres;
while he, the father, George’s father, sat alone at the soiled table of
a frowsy wine-shop.

Well?it was he who had so willed it. Life was too crazy a muddle?and who
could have foreseen that he might have been repaid for twenty-six years
with such a wife by keeping an undivided claim on such a son?

His meal over, he hastened back to the studio, hoping to find the dancer
there. Fortin-Lescluze had sworn to bring her at two, and Campton was
known to exact absolute punctuality. He had put the final touch to his
fame by refusing to paint the mad young Duchesse de la Tour Crenelee?who
was exceptionally paintable?because she had kept him waiting
three-quarters of an hour. But now, though it was nearly three, and the
dancer and her friend had not come, Campton dared not move, lest he
should miss Fortin-Lescluze.

“Sent for by a rich patient in a war-funk; or else hanging about in the
girl’s dressing-room while she polishes her toe-nails,” Campton
reflected; and sulkily sat down to wait.

He had never been willing to have a telephone. To him it was a live
thing, a kind of Laocoon-serpent that caught one in its coils and
dragged one struggling to the receiver. His friends had spent all their
logic in trying to argue away this belief; but he answered obstinately:
“Every one would be sure to call me up when Mariette was out.” Even the
Russian lady, during her brief reign, had pleaded in vain on this point.

He would have given a good deal now if he had listened to her. The
terror of having to cope with small material difficulties, always
strongest in him in moments of artistic inspiration?when the hushed
universe seemed hardly big enough to hold him and his model?this dread
anchored him to his seat while he tried to make up his mind to send Mme.
Lebel to the nearest telephone-station.

If he called to her, she would instantly begin: “And the war, sir?” And
he would have to settle that first. Besides, if he did not telephone
himself he could not make sure of another appointment with
Fortin-Lescluze. But the idea of battling alone with the telephone in a
public place covered his large body with a damp distress. If only George
had been in reach!

He waited till four, and then, furious, locked the studio and went down.
Mme. Lebel still sat in her spidery den. She looked at him gravely,
their eyes met, they exchanged a bow, but she did not move or speak. She
was busy as usual with some rusty sewing?he thought it odd that she
should not rush out to waylay him. Everything that day was odd.

He found all the telephone-booths besieged. The people waiting were
certainly bad cases of war-funk, to judge from their looks; after
scrutinizing them for a while he decided to return to his hotel, and try
to communicate with Fortin-Lescluze from there.

To his annoyance there was not a taxi to be seen. He limped down the
slope of Montmartre to the nearest metro-station, and just as he was
preparing to force his lame bulk into a crowded train, caught sight of a
solitary horse-cab: a vehicle he had not risked himself in for years.

The cab-driver, for gastronomic reasons, declined to take him farther
than the Madeleine; and getting out there, Campton walked along the rue
Royale. Everything still looked wonderfully as usual; and the fountains
in the Place sparkled gloriously.

Comparatively few people were about: he was surprised to see how few. A
small group of them, he noticed, had paused near the doorway of the
Ministry of Marine, and were looking?without visible excitement?at a
white paper pasted on the wall.

He crossed the street and looked too. In the middle of the paper, in
queer Gothic-looking characters, he saw the words

=“Les Armees De Terre et De Mer....”=

War had come??

He knew now that he had never for an instant believed it possible. Even
when he had had that white-lipped interview with the Brants, even when
he had planned to take Fortin-Lescluze by his senile infatuation, and
secure a medical certificate for George; even then, he had simply been
obeying the superstitious impulse which makes a man carry his umbrella
when he goes out on a cloudless morning.

War had come.

He stood on the edge of the sidewalk, and tried to think?now that it was
here?what it really meant: that is, what it meant to him. Beyond that he
had no intention of venturing. “This is not our job anyhow,” he
muttered, repeating the phrase with which he had bolstered up his talk
with Julia.

But abstract thinking was impossible: his confused mind could only
snatch at a few drifting scraps of purpose. “Let’s be practical,” he
said to himself.

The first thing to do was to get back to the hotel and call up the
physician. He strode along at his fastest limp, suddenly contemptuous of
the people who got in his way.

“War?and they’ve nothing to do but dawdle and gape! How like the
French!” He found himself hating the French.

He remembered that he had asked to have his sleepings engaged for the
following night. But even if he managed to secure his son’s discharge,
there could be no thought, now, of George’s leaving the country; and he
stopped at the desk to cancel the order.

There was no one behind the desk: one would have said that confusion
prevailed in the hall, if its emptiness had not made the word
incongruous. At last a waiter with rumpled hair strayed out of the
restaurant, and of him, imperiously, Campton demanded the concierge.

“The concierge? He’s gone.”

“To get my places for Naples?”

The waiter looked blank. “Gone: mobilised?to join his regiment. It’s the
war.”

“But look here, some one must have attended to getting my places, I
suppose,” cried Campton wrathfully. He invaded the inner office and
challenged a secretary who was trying to deal with several unmanageable
travellers, but who explained to him, patiently, that his sleepings had
certainly not been engaged, as no trains were leaving Paris for the
present. “Not for civilian travel,” he added, still more patiently.

Campton had a sudden sense of suffocation. No trains leaving Paris “for
the present”? But then people like himself?people who had nothing on
earth to do with the war?had been caught like rats in a trap! He
reflected with a shiver that Mrs. Brant would not be able to return to
Deauville, and would probably insist on his coming to see her every day.
He asked: “How long is this preposterous state of things to last?”?but
no one answered, and he stalked to the lift and had himself carried
upstairs.

He was confident that George would be there waiting; but the
sitting-room was empty. He felt as if he were on a desert island, with
the last sail disappearing over the dark rim of the world.

After much vain ringing he got into communication with Fortin’s house,
and heard a confused voice saying that the physician had already left
Paris.

“Left?for where? For how long?”

And then the eternal answer: “The doctor is mobilised. _It’s the war._”

Mobilised?already? Within the first twenty-four hours? A man of Fortin’s
age and authority? Campton was terrified by the uncanny rapidity with
which events were moving, he whom haste had always confused and
disconcerted, as if there were a secret link between his lameness and
the movements of his will. He rang up Dastrey, but no one answered.
Evidently his friend was out, and his friend’s _bonne_ also. “I suppose
_she’s_ mobilised: they’ll be mobilising the women next.”

At last, from sheer over-agitation, his fatigued mind began to move more
deliberately: he collected his wits, laboured with his more immediate
difficulties, and decided that he would go to Fortin-Lescluze’s house,
on the chance that the physician had not, after all, really started.

“Ten to one he won’t go till to-morrow,” Campton reasoned.

The hall of the hotel was emptier than ever, and no taxi was in sight
down the whole length of the rue Royale, or the rue Boissy d’Anglas, or
the rue de Rivoli: not even a horse-cab showed against the deserted
distances. He crossed to the metro, and painfully descended its many
stairs.




                                   VI


Campton, proffering twenty francs to an astonished maid-servant, learned
that, yes, to his intimates?and of course Monsieur was one??the doctor
_was_ in, was in fact dining, and did not leave till the next morning.

“Dining?at six o’clock?”

“Monsieur’s son, Monsieur Jean, is starting at once for his depot.
That’s the reason.”

Campton sent in his card. He expected to be received in the so-called
“studio,” a lofty room with Chinese hangings, Renaissance choir-stalls,
organ, grand piano, and post-impressionist paintings, where
Fortin-Lescluze received the celebrities of the hour. Mme. Fortin never
appeared there, and Campton associated the studio with amusing talk,
hot-house flowers, and ladies lolling on black velvet divans. He
supposed that the physician was separated from his wife, and that she
had a home of her own.

When the maid reappeared she did not lead him to the studio, but into a
small dining-room with the traditional Henri II sideboard of waxed
walnut, a hanging table-lamp under a beaded shade, an India-rubber plant
on a plush pedestal, and napkins that were just being restored to their
bone rings by the four persons seated about the red-and-white checkered
table-cloth.

These were: the great man himself, a tall large woman with grey hair, a
tiny old lady, her face framed in a peasant’s fluted cap, and a plain
young man wearing a private’s uniform, who had a nose like the doctor’s
and simple light blue eyes.

The two ladies and the young man?so much more interesting to the
painter’s eye than the sprawling beauties of the studio?were introduced
by Fortin-Lescluze as his wife, his mother and his son. Mme. Fortin
said, in a deep alto, a word or two about the privilege of meeting the
famous painter who had portrayed her husband, and the old mother, in a
piping voice, exclaimed: “Monsieur, I was at Sedan in 1870. I saw the
Germans. I saw the Emperor sitting on a bench. He was crying.”

“My mother’s heard everything, she’s seen everything. There’s no one in
the world like my mother!” the physician said, laying his hand on hers.

“You won’t see the Germans again, _ma bonne mere_!” her daughter-in-law
added, smiling.

Campton took coffee with them, bore with a little inevitable talk about
the war, and then eagerly questioned the son. The young man was a
chemist, a _preparateur_ in the laboratory of the Institut Pasteur. He
was also, it appeared, given to prehistoric archæology, and had written
a “thesis” on the painted caves of the Dordogne. He seemed extremely
serious, and absorbed in questions of science and letters. But it
appeared to him perfectly simple to be leaving it all in a few hours to
join his regiment. “The war had to come. This sort of thing couldn’t go
on,” he said, in the words of Mme. Lebel.

He was to start in an hour, and Campton excused himself for intruding on
the family, who seemed as happily united, as harmonious in their deeper
interests, as if no musical studio-parties and exotic dancers had ever
absorbed the master of the house.

Campton, looking at the group, felt a pang of envy, and thought, for the
thousandth time, how frail a screen of activity divided him from depths
of loneliness he dared not sound. “‘For every man hath business and
desire,’” he muttered as he followed the physician.

In the consulting-room he explained: “It’s about my son??”

He had not been able to bring the phrase out in the presence of the
young man who must have been just George’s age, and who was leaving in
an hour for his regiment. But between Campton and the father there were
complicities, and there might therefore be accommodations. In the
consulting-room one breathed a lower air.

It was not that Campton wanted to do anything underhand. He was
genuinely anxious about George’s health. After all, tuberculosis did not
disappear in a month or even a year: his anxiety was justified. And then
George, but for the stupid accident of his birth, would never have been
mixed up in the war. Campton felt that he could make his request with
his head high.

Fortin-Lescluze seemed to think so too; at any rate he expressed no
surprise. But could anything on earth have surprised him, after thirty
years in that confessional of a room?

The difficulty was that he did not see his way to doing anything?not
immediately, at any rate.

“You must let the boy join his base. He leaves to-morrow? Give me the
number of his regiment and the name of the town, and trust me to do what
I can.”

“But you’re off yourself?”

“Yes: I’m being sent to a hospital at Lyons. But I’ll leave you my
address.”

Campton lingered, unable to take this as final. He looked about him
uneasily, and then, for a moment, straight into the physician’s eyes.

“You must know how I feel; your boy is an only son, too.”

“Yes, yes,” the father assented, in the absent-minded tone of
professional sympathy. But Campton felt that he felt the deep
difference.

“Well, goodbye?and thanks.”

As Campton turned to go the physician laid a hand on his shoulder and
spoke with sudden fierce emotion. “Yes: Jean is an only son?an only
child. For his mother and myself it’s not a trifle?having our only son
in the war.”

There was no allusion to the dancer, no hint that Fortin remembered her;
it was Campton who lowered his gaze before the look in the other
father’s eyes.




                                  VII


“A son in the war??”

The words followed Campton down the stairs. What did it mean, and what
must it feel like, for parents in this safe denationalized modern world
to be suddenly saying to each other with white lips: A son in the war?

He stood on the kerbstone, staring ahead of him and forgetting whither
he was bound. The world seemed to lie under a spell, and its weight was
on his limbs and brain. Usually any deep inward trouble made him more
than ever alive to the outward aspect of things; but this new world in
which people talked glibly of sons in the war had suddenly become
invisible to him, and he did not know where he was, or what he was
staring at. He noted the fact, and remembered a story of St. Bernard?he
thought it was?walking beside a beautiful lake in supersensual ecstasy,
and saying afterward: “Was there a lake? I didn’t see it.”

On the way back to the hotel he passed the American Embassy, and had a
vague idea of trying to see the Ambassador and find out if the United
States were not going to devise some way of evading the tyrannous
regulation that bound young Americans to France. “And they call this a
free country!” he heard himself exclaiming.

The remark sounded exactly like one of Julia’s, and this reminded him
that the Ambassador frequently dined at the Brants’. They had certainly
not left his door untried; and since, to the Brant circles, Campton was
still a shaggy Bohemian, his appeal was not likely to fortify theirs.

His mind turned to Jorgenstein, and the vast web of the speculator’s
financial relations. But, after all, France was on the verge of war, if
not in it; and following up the threads of the Jorgenstein web was
likely to land one in Frankfort or Vienna.

At the hotel he found his sitting-room empty; but presently the door
opened and George came in laden with books, fresh yellow and grey ones
in Flammarion wrappers.

“Hullo, Dad,” he said; and added: “So the silly show is on.”

“Mobilisation is not war??,” said Campton.

“No??”

“What on earth are all those books?”

“Provender. It appears we may rot at the depot for weeks. I’ve just seen
a chap who’s in my regiment.”

Campton felt a sudden relief. The purchase of the books proved that
George was fairly sure he would not be sent to the front. His father
went up to him and tapped him on the chest.

“How about this???” He wanted to add: “I’ve just seen Fortin, who says
he’ll get you off”; but though George’s eye was cool and unenthusiastic
it did not encourage such confidences.

“Oh?lungs? I imagine I’m sound again.” He paused, and stooped to turn
over the books. Carelessly, he added: “But then the stethoscope may
think differently. Nothing to do but wait and see.”

“Of course,” Campton agreed.

It was clear that the boy hated what was ahead of him; and what more
could his father ask? Of course he was not going to confess to a desire
to shirk his duty; but it was easy to see that his whole lucid
intelligence repudiated any sympathy with the ruinous adventure.

“Have you seen Adele?” Campton enquired, and George replied that he had
dropped in for five minutes, and that Miss Anthony wanted to see his
father.

“Is she?nervous?”

“Old Adele? I should say not: she’s fighting mad. _La Revanche_ and all
the rest of it. She doesn’t realize?_sancta simplicitas!_”

“Oh, I can see Adele throwing on the faggots!”

Father and son were silent, both busy lighting cigarettes. When George’s
was lit he remarked: “Well, if we’re not called at once it’ll be a good
chance to read ‘The Golden Bough’ right through.”

Campton stared, not knowing the book even by name. What a queer
changeling the boy was! But George’s composure, his deep and genuine
indifference to the whole political turmoil, once more fortified his
father.

“Have they any news??” he ventured. “They,” in their private language,
meant the Brants.

“Oh, yes, lots: Uncle Andy was stiff with it. But not really amounting
to anything. Of course there’s no doubt there’ll be war.”

“How about England?”

“Nobody knows; but the bankers seem to think England’s all right.”
George paused, and finally added: “Look here, dear old boy?before she
leaves I think mother wants to see you.”

Campton hardened instantly. “She _has_ seen me?yesterday.”

“I know; she told me.”

The son began to cut the pages of one of his books with a visiting-card
he had picked up, and the father stood looking out on the Place de la
Concorde through the leafy curtain of the terrace.

Campton knew that he could not refuse his son’s request; in his heart of
hearts he was glad it had been made, since it might mean that “they” had
found a way?perhaps through the Ambassador.

But he could never prevent a stiffening of his whole self at any summons
or suggestion from the Brants. He thought of the seeming unity of the
Fortin-Lescluze couple, and of the background of peaceful family life
revealed by the scene about the checkered table-cloth. Perhaps that was
one of the advantages of a social organization which still, as a whole,
ignored divorce, and thought any private condonation better than the
open breaking up of the family.

“All right; I’ll go??” he agreed. “Where are we dining?”

“Oh, I forgot?an awful orgy. Dastrey wants us at the Union. Louis
Dastrey is dining with him, and he let me ask Boylston??”

“Boylston???”

“You don’t know him. A chap who was at Harvard with me. He’s out here
studying painting at the Beaux Arts. He’s an awfully good sort, and he
wanted to see me before I go.”

The father’s heart sank. Only one whole day more with his boy, and this
last evening but one was to be spent with poor embittered Dastrey, and
two youths, one unknown to Campton, who would drown them in stupid
war-chatter! But it was what George wanted; and there must not be a
shade, for George, on these last hours.

“All right! You promised me something awful for to-night,” Campton
grinned sardonically.

“Do you mind? I’m sorry.”

“It’s only Dastrey’s damned chauvinism that I mind. Why don’t you ask
Adele to join the chorus?”

“Well?you’ll like Boylston,” said George.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Dastrey, after all, turned out less tragic and aggressive than Campton
had feared. His irritability had vanished, and though he was very grave
he seemed preoccupied only with the fate of Europe, and not with his
personal stake in the affair.

But the older men said little. The youngsters had the floor, and
Campton, as he listened to George and young Louis Dastrey, was overcome
by a sense of such dizzy unreality that he had to grasp the arms of his
ponderous leather armchair to assure himself that he was really in the
flesh and in the world.

What! Two days ago they were still in the old easy Europe, a Europe in
which one could make plans, engage passages on trains and steamers,
argue about pictures, books, theatres, ideas, draw as much money as one
chose out of the bank, and say: “The day after to-morrow I’ll be in
Berlin or Vienna or Belgrade.” And here they sat in their same evening
clothes, about the same shining mahogany writing-table, apparently the
same group of free and independent youths and elderly men, and in
reality prisoners, every one of them, hand-cuffed to this hideous masked
bully of “War”!

The young men were sure that the conflict was inevitable?the evening
papers left no doubt of it?and there was much animated discussion
between young Dastrey and George.

Already their views diverged; the French youth, theoretically at one
with his friend as to the senselessness of war in general, had at once
resolutely disengaged from the mist of doctrine the fatal necessity of
this particular war.

“It’s the old festering wound of Alsace-Lorraine: Bismarck foresaw it
and feared it?or perhaps planned it and welcomed it: who knows? But as
long as the wound was there, Germany believed that France would try to
avenge it, and as long as Germany believed that, she had to keep up her
own war-strength; and she’s kept it up to the toppling-over point,
ruining herself and us. That’s the whole thing, as I see it. War’s rot;
but to get rid of war forever we’ve got to fight this one first.”

It was wonderful to Campton that this slender learned youth should
already have grasped the necessity of the conflict and its deep causes.
While his own head was still spinning with wrath and bewilderment at the
bottomless perversity of mankind, Louis Dastrey had analyzed and
accepted the situation and his own part in it. And he was not simply
resigned; he was trembling with eagerness to get the thing over. “If
only England is with us we’re safe?it’s a matter of weeks,” he declared.

“Wait a bit?wait a bit; I want to know more about a whole lot of things
before I fix a date for the fall of Berlin,” his uncle interposed; but
Louis flung him a radiant look. “We’ve been there before, my uncle!”

“But there’s Russia too??” said Boylston explosively. He had not spoken
before.

“‘_Nous l’avons eu, votre Rhin allemand_,’” quoted George, as he poured
a golden Hock into his glass.

He was keenly interested, that was evident; but interested as a
looker-on, a dilettante. He had neither Valmy nor Sedan in his blood,
and it was as a sympathizing spectator that he ought by rights to have
been sharing his friend’s enthusiasm, not as a combatant compelled to
obey the same summons. Campton, glancing from one to another of their
brilliant faces, felt his determination harden to save George from the
consequences of his parents’ stupid blunder.

After dinner young Dastrey proposed a music-hall. The audience would be
a curious sight: there would be wild enthusiasm, and singing of the
Marseillaise. The other young men agreed, but their elders, after a
tacitly exchanged glance, decided to remain at the club, on the plea
that some one at the Ministry of War had promised to telephone if there
were fresh news.

Campton and Dastrey, left alone, stood on the balcony watching the
Boulevards. The streets, so deserted during the day, had become suddenly
and densely populated. Hardly any vehicles were in sight: the motor
omnibuses were already carrying troops to the stations, there was a
report abroad that private motors were to be requisitioned, and only a
few taxis and horse-cabs, packed to the driver’s box with young men in
spick-and-span uniforms, broke through the mass of pedestrians which
filled the whole width of the Boulevards. This mass moved slowly and
vaguely, swaying this way and that, as though it awaited a portent from
the heavens. In the glare of electric lamps and glittering
theatre-fronts the innumerable faces stood out vividly, grave, intent,
slightly bewildered. Except when the soldiers passed no cries or songs
came from the crowd, but only the deep inarticulate rumour which any
vast body of people gives forth.

“Queer??! How silent they are: how do you think they’re taking it?”
Campton questioned.

But Dastrey had grown belligerent again. He saw the throngs before him
bounding toward the frontier like the unchained furies of Rude’s
“Marseillaise”; whereas to Campton they seemed full of the dumb wrath of
an orderly and laborious people upon whom an unrighteous quarrel has
been forced. He knew that the thought of Alsace-Lorraine still stirred
in French hearts; but all Dastrey’s eloquence could not convince him
that these people wanted war, or would have sought it had it not been
thrust on them. The whole monstrous injustice seemed to take shape
before him, and to brood like a huge sky-filling dragon of the northern
darknesses over his light-loving, pleasure-loving, labour-loving France.

                  *       *       *       *       *

George came home late.

It was two in the morning of his last day with his boy when Campton
heard the door open, and saw a flash of turned on light.

All night he had lain staring into the darkness, and thinking, thinking:
thinking of George’s future, George’s friends, George and women, of that
unknown side of his boy’s life which, in this great upheaval of things,
had suddenly lifted its face to the surface. If war came, if George were
not discharged, if George were sent to the front, if George were killed,
how strange to think that things the father did not know of might turn
out to have been the central things of his son’s life!

The young man came in, and Campton looked at him as though he were a
stranger.

“Hullo, Dad?any news from the Ministry?” George, tossing aside his hat
and stick, sat down on the bed. He had a crumpled rose in his
button-hole, and looked gay and fresh, with the indestructible freshness
of youth.

“What do I really know of him?” the father asked himself.

Yes: Dastrey had had news. Germany had already committed acts of overt
hostility on the frontier: telegraph and telephone communications had
been cut, French locomotives seized, troops massed along the border on
the specious pretext of the “_Kriegsgefahr-zustand_.” It was war.

“Oh, well,” George shrugged. He lit a cigarette, and asked: “What did
you think of Boylston?”

“Boylston???”

“The fat brown chap at dinner.”

“Yes?yes?of course.” Campton became aware that he had not thought of
Boylston at all, had hardly been aware of his presence. But the
painter’s registering faculty was always latently at work, and in an
instant he called up a round face, shyly jovial, with short-sighted
brown eyes as sharp as needles, and dark hair curling tightly over a
wide watchful forehead.

“Why?I liked him.”

“I’m glad, because it was a tremendous event for him, seeing you. He
paints, and he’s been keen on your things for years.”

“I wish I’d known.... Why didn’t he say so? He didn’t say anything, did
he?”

“No: he doesn’t, much, when he’s pleased. He’s the very best chap I
know,” George concluded.




                                  VIII


That morning the irrevocable stared at him from the head-lines of the
papers. The German Ambassador was recalled. Germany had declared war on
France at 6.40 the previous evening; there was an unintelligible
allusion, in the declaration, to French aeroplanes throwing bombs on
Nuremberg and Wesel. Campton read that part of the message over two or
three times.

Aeroplanes throwing bombs? Aeroplanes as engines of destruction? He had
always thought of them as a kind of giant kite that fools went up in
when they were tired of breaking their necks in other ways. But
aeroplane bombardment as a cause for declaring war? The bad faith of it
was so manifest that he threw down the papers half relieved. Of course
there would be a protest on the part of the allies; a great country like
France would not allow herself to be bullied into war on such a pretext.

The ultimatum to Belgium was more serious; but Belgium’s gallant reply
would no doubt check Germany on that side. After all, there was such a
thing as international law, and Germany herself had recognized it.... So
his mind spun on in vain circles, while under the frail web of his
casuistry gloomed the obstinate fact that George was mobilised, that
George was to leave the next morning.

The day wore on: it was the shortest and yet most interminable that
Campton had ever known. Paris, when he went out into it, was more
dazzlingly empty than ever. In the hotel, in the hall, on the stairs, he
was waylaid by flustered compatriots?“Oh, Mr. Campton, you don’t know
me, but of course all Americans know _you_!”?who appealed to him for the
very information he was trying to obtain for himself: how one could get
money, how one could get hold of the concierge, how one could send
cables, if there was any restaurant where the waiters had not all been
mobilised, if he had any “pull” at the Embassy, or at any of the
steamship offices, or any of the banks. One disordered beauty blurted
out: “Of course, with your connection with Bullard and Brant”?and was
only waked to her mistake by Campton’s indignant stare, and his plunge
past her while she called out excuses.

But the name acted as a reminder of his promise to go and see Mrs.
Brant, and he decided to make his visit after lunch, when George would
be off collecting last things. Visiting the Brants with George would
have been beyond his capacity.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The great drawing-rooms, their awnings spread against the sun, their
tall windows wide to the glow of the garden, were empty when he entered;
but in a moment he was joined by a tall angular woman with a veil pushed
up untidily above her pink nose. Campton reflected that he had never
seen Adele Anthony in the daytime without a veil pushed up above a
flushed nose, and dangling in irregular wisps from the back of a small
hard hat of which the shape never varied.

“Julia will be here in a minute. When she told me you were coming I
waited.”

He was glad to have a word with her before meeting Mrs. Brant, though
his impulse had been almost as strong to avoid the one as the other. He
dreaded belligerent bluster as much as vain whimpering, and in the
depths of his soul he had to own that it would have been easier to talk
to Mr. Brant than to either of the women.

“Julia is powdering her nose,” Miss Anthony continued. “She has an idea
that if you see she’s been crying you’ll be awfully angry.”

Campton made an impatient gesture. “If I were?much it would matter!”

“Ah, but you might tell George; and George is not to know.” She paused,
and then bounced round on him abruptly. She always moved and spoke in
explosions, as if the wires that agitated her got tangled, and then were
too suddenly jerked loose.

“_Does_ George know?”

“About his mother’s tears?”

“About this plan you’re all hatching to have him discharged?”

Campton reddened under her lashless blue gaze, and the consciousness of
doing so made his answer all the curter.

“Probably not?unless you’ve told him!”

The shot appeared to reach the mark, for an answering blush suffused her
sallow complexion. “You’d better not put ideas into my head!” she
laughed. Something in her tone reminded him of all her old dogged
loyalties, and made him ashamed of his taunt.

“Anyhow,” he grumbled, “his place is not in the French army.”

“That was for you and Julia to decide twenty-six years ago, wasn’t it?
Now it’s up to him.”

Her capricious adoption of American slang, fitted anyhow into her
old-fashioned and punctilious English, sometimes amused but oftener
exasperated Campton.

“If you’re going to talk modern slang you ought to give up those
ridiculous stays, and not wear a fringe like a mid-Victorian royalty,”
he jeered, trying to laugh off his exasperation.

She let this pass with a smile. “Well, I wish I could find the language
to make you understand how much better it would be to leave George
alone. This war will be the making of him.”

“He’s made quite to my satisfaction as it is, thanks. But what’s the use
of talking? You always get your phrases out of books.”

The door opened, and Mrs. Brant came in.

Her appearance answered to Miss Anthony’s description. A pearly mist
covered her face, and some reviving liquid had cleared her congested
eyes. Her poor hands had suddenly grown so thin and dry that the heavy
rings, slipping down to the joints, slid back into place as she shook
hands with Campton.

“Thank you for coming,” she said.

“Oh??” he protested, helpless, and disturbed by Miss Anthony’s presence.
At the moment his former wife’s feelings were more intelligible to him
than his friend’s: the maternal fibre stirred in her, and made her more
appealing than any elderly virgin on the war-path.

“I’m off, my dears,” said the elderly virgin, as if guessing his
thought. Her queer shallow eyes included them both in a sweeping glance,
and she flung back from the threshold: “Be careful of what you say to
George.”

What they had to say to each other did not last many minutes. The Brants
had made various efforts, but had been baffled on all sides by the
general agitation and confusion. In high quarters the people they wanted
to see were inaccessible; and those who could be reached lent but a
distracted ear. The Ambassador had at once declared that he could do
nothing; others vaguely promised they “would see”?but hardly seemed to
hear what they were being asked.

“And meanwhile time is passing?and he’s going!” Mrs. Brant lamented.

The reassurance that Campton brought from Fortin-Lescluze, vague though
it was, came to her as a miraculous promise, and raised Campton suddenly
in her estimation. She looked at him with a new confidence, and he could
almost hear her saying to Brant, as he had so often heard her say to
himself: “You never seem able to get anything done. I don’t know how
other people manage.”

Her gratitude gave him the feeling of having been engaged in something
underhand and pusillanimous. He made haste to take leave, after
promising to pass on any word he might receive from the physician; but
he reminded her that he was not likely to hear anything till George had
been for some days at his base.

She acknowledged the probability of this, and clung to him with trustful
eyes. She was much disturbed by the preposterous fact that the
Government had already requisitioned two of the Brant motors, and
Campton had an idea that, dazzled by his newly-developed capacity to
“manage,” she was about to implore him to rescue from the clutches of
the authorities her Rolls-Royce and Anderson’s Delaunay.

He was hastening to leave when the door again opened. A rumpled-looking
maid peered in, evidently perplexed, and giving way doubtfully to a
young woman who entered with a rush, and then paused as if she too were
doubtful. She was pretty in an odd dishevelled way, and with her
elaborate clothes and bewildered look she reminded Campton of a
fashion-plate torn from its page and helplessly blown about the world.
He had seen the same type among his compatriots any number of times in
the last days.

“Oh, Mrs. Brant?yes, I _know_ you gave orders that you were not in to
anybody, but I just wouldn’t listen, and it’s not that poor woman’s
fault,” the visitor began, in a plaintive staccato which matched her sad
eyes and her fluttered veils.

“You see, I simply had to get hold of Mr. Brant, because I’m here
without a penny?literally!” She dangled before them a bejewelled
mesh-bag. “And in a hotel where they don’t know me. And at the bank they
wouldn’t listen to me, and they said Mr. Brant wasn’t there, though of
course I suppose he was; so I said to the cashier: ‘Very well, then,
I’ll simply go to the Avenue Marigny and batter in his door?unless you’d
rather I jumped into the Seine?’”

“Oh, Mrs. Talkett??” murmured Mrs. Brant.

“Really: it’s a case of my money or my life!” the young lady continued
with a studied laugh. She stood between them, artificial and yet so
artless, conscious of intruding but evidently used to having her
intrusions pardoned; and her large eyes turned interrogatively to
Campton.

“Of course my husband will do all he can for you. I’ll telephone,” said
Mrs. Brant; then, perceiving that her visitor continued to gaze at
Campton, she added: “Oh, no, _this_ is not ... this is Mr. Campton.”

“John Campton? I knew it!” Mrs. Talkett’s eyes became devouring and
brilliant. “Of course I ought to have recognized you at once?from your
photographs. I have one pinned up in my room. But I was so flurried when
I came in.” She detained the painter’s hand. “Do forgive me! For _years_
I’ve dreamed of your doing me ... you see, I paint a little myself ...
but it’s ridiculous to speak of such things now.” She added, as if she
were risking something: “I knew your son at St. Moritz. We saw a great
deal of him there, and in New York last winter.”

“Ah??” said Campton, bowing awkwardly.

“Cursed fools?all women,” he anathematized her on the way downstairs.

In the street, however, he felt grateful to her for reducing Mrs. Brant
to such confusion that she had made no attempt to detain him. His way of
life lay so far apart from his former wife’s that they had hardly ever
been exposed to accidents of the kind, and he saw that Julia’s
embarrassment kept all its freshness.

The fact set him thinking curiously of what her existence had been since
they had parted. She had long since forgotten her youthful art-jargon to
learn others more consonant to her tastes. As the wife of the powerful
American banker she dispensed the costliest hospitality with the simple
air of one who has never learnt that human life may be sustained without
the aid of orchids and champagne. With guests either brought up in the
same convictions or bent on acquiring them she conversed earnestly and
unweariedly about motors, clothes and morals; but perhaps her most
stimulating hours were those brightened by the weekly visit of the
Rector of her parish. With happy untrammelled hands she was now free to
rebuild to her own measure a corner of the huge wicked welter of Paris;
and immediately it became as neat, as empty, as air-tight as her own
immaculate drawing-room. There he seemed to see her, throning year after
year in an awful emptiness of wealth and luxury and respectability,
seeing only dull people, doing only dull things, and fighting feverishly
to defend the last traces of a beauty which had never given her anything
but the tamest and most unprofitable material prosperity.

“She’s never even had the silly kind of success she wanted?poor Julia!”
he mused, wondering that she had been able to put into her life so few
of the sensations which can be bought by wealth and beauty. “And now
what will be left?how on earth will she fit into a war?”

He was sure all her plans had been made for the coming six months: her
week-end sets of heavy millionaires secured for Deauville, and after
that for the shooting at the big chateau near Compiegne, and three weeks
reserved for Biarritz before the return to Paris in January. One of the
luxuries Julia had most enjoyed after her separation from Campton (Adele
had told him) had been that of planning things ahead: Mr. Brant, thank
heaven, was not impulsive. And now here was this black bolt of war
falling among all her carefully balanced arrangements with a crash more
violent than any of Campton’s inconsequences!

As he reached the Place de la Concorde a newsboy passed with the three
o’clock papers, and he bought one and read of the crossing of Luxembourg
and the invasion of Belgium. The Germans were arrogantly acting up to
their menace: heedless of international law, they were driving straight
for France and England by the road they thought the most accessible....

In the hotel he found George, red with rage, devouring the same paper:
the boy’s whole look was changed.

“The howling blackguards! The brigands! This isn’t war?it’s simple
murder!”

The two men stood and stared at each other. “Will England stand it?”
sprang to their lips at the same moment.

Never?never! England would never permit such a violation of the laws
regulating the relations between civilized peoples. They began to say
both together that after all perhaps it was the best thing that could
have happened, since, if there had been the least hesitation or
reluctance in any section of English opinion, this abominable outrage
would instantly sweep it away.

“They’ve been too damned clever for once!” George exulted. “France is
saved?that’s certain anyhow!”

Yes; France was saved if England could put her army into the field at
once. But could she? Oh, for the Channel tunnel at this hour! Would this
lesson at last cure England of her obstinate insularity? Belgium had
announced her intention of resisting; but what was that gallant
declaration worth in face of Germany’s brutal assault? A poor little
country pledged to a guaranteed neutrality could hardly be expected to
hold her frontiers more than forty-eight hours against the most powerful
army in Europe. And what a narrow strip Belgium was, viewed as an
outpost of France!

These thoughts, racing through Campton’s mind, were swept out of it
again by his absorbing preoccupation. What effect would the Belgian
affair have on George’s view of his own participation in the war? For
the first time the boy’s feelings were visibly engaged; his voice shook
as he burst out: “Louis Dastrey’s right: this kind of thing has got to
stop. We shall go straight back to cannibalism if it doesn’t.?God, what
hounds!”

Yes, but?Campton pondered, tried to think up Pacifist arguments,
remembered his own discussion with Paul Dastrey three days before. “My
dear chap, hasn’t France perhaps gone about with a chip on her shoulder?
Saverne, for instance: some people think??”

“Damn Saverne! Haven’t the Germans shown us what they are now? Belgium
sheds all the light _I_ want on Saverne. They’re not fit to live with
white people, and the sooner they’re shown it the better.”

“Well, France and Russia and England are here to show them.”

George laughed. “Yes, and double quick.”

Both were silent again, each thinking his own thoughts. They were
apparently the same, for just as Campton was about to ask where George
had decided that they should take their last dinner, the young man said
abruptly: “Look here, Dad; I’d planned a little tete-a-tete for us this
evening.”

“Yes???”

“Well?I can’t. I’m going to chuck you.” He smiled a little, his colour
rising nervously. “For some people I’ve just run across?who were awfully
kind to me at St. Moritz?and in New York last winter. I didn’t know they
were here till ... till just now. I’m awfully sorry; but I’ve simply got
to dine with them.”

There was a silence. Campton stared out over his son’s shoulder at the
great sunlit square. “Oh, all right,” he said briskly.

This?on George’s last night!

“You don’t mind _much_, do you? I’ll be back early, for a last pow-wow
on the terrace.” George paused, and finally brought out: “You see, it
really wouldn’t have done to tell mother that I was deserting her on my
last evening because I was dining with you!”

A weight was lifted from Campton’s heart, and he felt ashamed of having
failed to guess the boy’s real motive.

“My dear fellow, naturally ... quite right. And you can stop in and see
your mother on the way home. You’ll find me here whenever you turn up.”

George looked relieved. “Thanks a lot?you always know. And now for my
adieux to Adele.”

He went off whistling the waltz from the Rosenkavalier, and Campton
returned to his own thoughts.

                  *       *       *       *       *

He was still revolving them when he went upstairs after a solitary
repast in the confused and servantless dining-room. Adele Anthony had
telephoned to him to come and dine?after seeing George, he supposed; but
he had declined. He wanted to be with his boy, or alone.

As he left the dining-room he ran across Adamson, the American newspaper
correspondent, who had lived for years in Paris and was reputed to have
“inside information.” Adamson was grave but confident. In his opinion
Russia would probably not get to Berlin before November (he smiled at
Campton’s astonished outcry); but if England?oh, they were sure of
England!?could get her army over without delay, the whole business would
very likely be settled before that, in one big battle in Belgium.
(Yes?poor Belgium, indeed!) Anyhow, in the opinion of the military
experts the war was not likely to last more than three or four months;
and of course, even if things went badly on the western front, which was
highly unlikely, there was Russia to clench the business as soon as her
huge forces got in motion. Campton drew much comfort from this sober
view of the situation, midway between that of the optimists who knew
Russia would be in Berlin in three weeks, and of those who saw the
Germans in Calais even sooner. Adamson was a levelheaded fellow, who
weighed what he said and pinned his faith to facts.

Campton managed to evade several people whom he saw lurking for him, and
mounted to his room. On the terrace, alone with the serene city, his
confidence grew, and he began to feel more and more sure that, whatever
happened, George was likely to be kept out of the fighting till the
whole thing was over. With such formidable forces closing in on her it
was fairly obvious that Germany must succumb before half or even a
quarter of the allied reserves had been engaged. Sustained by the
thought, he let his mind hover tenderly over George’s future, and the
effect on his character of this brief and harmless plunge into a
military career.




                                   IX


George was gone.

When, with a last whistle and scream, his train had ploughed its way out
of the clanging station; when the last young figures clinging to the
rear of the last carriage had vanished, and the bare rails again
glittered up from the cindery tracks, Campton turned and looked about
him.

All the platforms of the station were crowded as he had seldom seen any
place crowded, and to his surprise he found himself taking in every
detail of the scene with a morbid accuracy of observation. He had
discovered, during these last days, that his artist’s vision had been
strangely unsettled. Sometimes, as when he had left Fortin’s house, he
saw nothing: the material world, which had always tugged at him with a
thousand hands, vanished and left him in the void. Then again, as at
present, he saw everything, saw it too clearly, in all its superfluous
and negligible reality, instead of instinctively selecting, and
disregarding what was not to his purpose.

Faces, faces?they swarmed about him, and his overwrought vision
registered them one by one. Especially he noticed the faces of the
women, women of all ages, all classes. These were the wives, mothers,
grandmothers, sisters, mistresses of all those heavily laden trainfuls
of French youth. He was struck with the same strong cheerfulness in all:
some pale, some flushed, some serious, but all firmly and calmly
smiling.

One young woman in particular his look dwelt on?a dark girl in a
becoming dress?both because she was so pleasant to see, and because
there was such assurance in her serenity that she did not have to
constrain her lips and eyes, but could trust them to be what she wished.
Yet he saw by the way she clung to the young artilleryman from whom she
was parting that hers were no sisterly farewells.

An immense hum of voices filled the vast glazed enclosure. Campton
caught the phrases flung up to the young faces piled one above another
in the windows?words of motherly admonishment, little jokes, tender
names, mirthful allusions, last callings out: “Write often! Don’t forget
to wrap up your throat.... Remember to send a line to Annette.... Bring
home a Prussian helmet for the children! _On les aura, pas, mon vieux?_”
It was all bright, brave and confident. “If Berlin could only see it!”
Campton thought.

He tried to remember what his own last words to George had been, but
could not; yet his throat felt dry and thirsty, as if he had talked a
great deal. The train vanished in a roar, and he leaned against a pier
to let the crowd flood by, not daring to risk his lameness in such a
turmoil.

Suddenly he heard loud sobs behind him. He turned, and recognized the
hat and hair of the girl whose eyes had struck him. He could not see
them now, for they were buried in her hands and her whole body shook
with woe. An elderly man was trying to draw her away?her father,
probably.

“Come, come, my child??”

“Oh?oh?oh,” she hiccoughed, following blindly.

The people nearest stared at her, and the faces of other women grew
pale. Campton saw tears on the cheeks of an old body in a black bonnet
who might have been his own Mme. Lebel. A pale lad went away weeping.

But they were all afraid, then, all in immediate deadly fear for the
lives of their beloved! The same fear grasped Campton’s heart, a very
present terror, such as he had hardly before imagined. Compared to it,
all that he had felt hitherto seemed as faint as the sensations of a
looker-on. His knees failed him, and he grasped a transverse bar of the
pier.

People were leaving the station in groups of two or three who seemed to
belong to each other; only he was alone. George’s mother had not come to
bid her son goodbye; she had declared that she would rather take leave
of him quietly in her own house than in a crowd of dirty people at the
station. But then it was impossible to conceive of her being up and
dressed and at the Gare de l’Est at five in the morning?and how could
she have got there without her motor? So Campton was alone, in that
crowd which seemed all made up of families.

But no?not all. Ahead of him he saw one woman moving away alone, and
recognized, across the welter of heads, Adele Anthony’s adamantine hat
and tight knob of hair.

Poor Adele! So she had come too?and had evidently failed in her quest,
not been able to fend a way through the crowd, and perhaps not even had
a glimpse of her hero. The thought smote Campton with compunction: he
regretted his sneering words when they had last met, regretted refusing
to dine with her. He wished the barrier of people between them had been
less impenetrable; but for the moment it was useless to try to force a
way through it. He had to wait till the crowd shifted to other
platforms, whence other trains were starting, and by that time she was
lost to sight.

At last he was able to make his way through the throng, and as he came
out of a side entrance he saw her. She appeared to be looking for a
taxi?she waved her sunshade aimlessly. But no one who knew the Gare de
l’Est would have gone around that corner to look for a taxi; least of
all the practical Adele. Besides, Adele never took taxis: she travelled
in the bowels of the earth or on the dizziest omnibus tops.

Campton knew at once that she was waiting for him. He went up to her and
a guilty pink suffused her nose.

“You missed him after all???” he said.

“I?oh, no, I didn’t.”

“You didn’t? But I was with him all the time. We didn’t see you??”

“No, but _I_ saw?distinctly. That was all I went for,” she jerked back.

He slipped his arm through hers. “This crowd terrifies me. I’m glad you
waited for me,” he said.

He saw her pleasure, but she merely answered: “I’m dying of thirst,
aren’t you?”

“Yes?or hunger, or something. Could we find a _laiterie_?”

They found one, and sat down among early clerks and shop-girls, and a
few dishevelled women with swollen faces whom Campton had noticed in the
station. One of them, who sat opposite an elderly man, had drawn out a
pocket mirror and was powdering her nose.

Campton hated to see women powder their noses?one of the few merits with
which he credited Julia Brant was that of never having adopted these
dirty modern fashions, of continuing to make her toilet in private “like
a lady,” as people used to say when he was young. But now the gesture
charmed him, for he had recognized the girl who had been sobbing in the
station.

“How game she is! I like that. But why is she so frightened?” he
wondered. For he saw that her chocolate was untouched, and that the
smile had stiffened on her lips.

Since his talk with Adamson he could not bring himself to be seriously
alarmed. Fear had taken him by the throat for a moment in the station,
at the sound of the girl’s sobs; but already he had thrown it off.
Everybody agreed that the war was sure to be over in a few weeks; even
Dastrey had come round to that view; and with Fortin’s protection, and
the influences Anderson Brant could put in motion, George was surely
safe?as safe at his depot as anywhere else in this precarious world.
Campton poured out Adele’s coffee, and drank off his own as if it had
been champagne.

“Do you know anything about the people George was dining with last
night?” he enquired abruptly.

Miss Anthony knew everything and everybody in the American circle in
Paris; she was a clearing-house of Franco-American gossip, and it was
likely enough that if George had special reasons for wishing to spend
his last evening away from his family she would know why. But the chance
of her knowing what had been kept from him made Campton’s question, as
soon as it was put, seem indiscreet, and he added hastily: “Not that I
want??”

She looked surprised. “No: he didn’t tell me. Some young man’s affair, I
suppose....” She smirked absurdly, her lashless eyes blinking under the
pushed-back veil.

Campton’s mind had already strayed from the question. Nothing bored him
more than Adele doing the “sad dog,” and he was vexed at having given
her such a chance to be silly. What he wanted to know was whether George
had spoken to his old friend about his future?about his own idea of his
situation, and his intentions and wishes in view of the grim chance
which people, with propitiatory vagueness, call “anything happening.”
Had the boy left any word, any message with her for any one? But it was
useless to speculate, for if he had, the old goose, true as steel, would
never betray it by as much as a twitch of her lids. She could look, when
it was a question of keeping a secret, like such an impenetrable idiot
that one could not imagine any one’s having trusted a secret to her.

Campton had no wish to surprise George’s secrets, if the boy had any.
But their parting had been so hopelessly Anglo-Saxon, so curt and
casual, that he would have liked to think his son had left, somewhere, a
message for him, a word, a letter, in case ... in case there was
anything premonitory in the sobbing of that girl at the next table.

But Adele’s pink nose confronted him, as guileless as a rabbit’s, and he
went out with her unsatisfied. They parted at the door of the
restaurant, and Campton went to the studio to see if there were any news
of his maid-servant Mariette. He meant to return to sleep there that
night, and even his simple housekeeping was likely to be troublesome if
Mariette should not arrive.

On the way it occurred to him that he had not yet seen the morning
papers, and he stopped and bought a handful.

Negotiations, hopes, fears, conjectures?but nothing new or definite,
except the insolent fact of Germany’s aggression, and the
almost-certainty of England’s intervention. When he reached the studio
he found Mme. Lebel in her usual place, paler than usual, but with firm
lips and bright eyes. Her three grandsons had left for their depots the
day before: one was in the _Chasseurs Alpins_, and probably already on
his way to Alsace, another in the infantry, the third in the heavy
artillery; she did not know where the two latter were likely to be sent.
Her eldest son, their father, was dead; the second, a man of fifty, and
a cabinetmaker by trade, was in the territorials, and was not to report
for another week. He hoped, before leaving, to see the return of his
wife and little girl, who were in the Ardennes with the wife’s people.
Mme. Lebel’s mind was made up and her philosophy ready for immediate
application.

“It’s terribly hard for the younger people; but it had to be. I come
from Nancy, Monsieur: I remember the German occupation. I understand
better than my daughter-in-law....”

There was no news of Mariette, and small chance of having any for some
days, much less of seeing her. No one could tell how long civilian
travel would be interrupted. Mme. Lebel, moved by her lodger’s plight,
promised to “find some one”; and Campton mounted to the studio.

He had left it only two days before, on the day when he had vainly
waited for Fortin and his dancer; and an abyss already divided him from
that vanished time. Then his little world still hung like a straw above
an eddy; now it was spinning about in the central vortex.

The pictures stood about untidily, and he looked curiously at all those
faces which belonged to the other life. Each bore the mark of its own
immediate passions and interests; not one betrayed the least
consciousness of coming disaster except the face of poor Madame de
Dolmetsch, whose love had enlightened her. Campton began to think of the
future from the painter’s point of view. What a modeller of faces a
great war must be! What would the people who came through it look like,
he wondered.

His bell tinkled, and he turned to answer it. Dastrey, he supposed ...
he had caught a glimpse of his friend across the crowd at the Gare de
l’Est, seeing off his nephew, but had purposely made no sign. He still
wanted to be alone, and above all not to hear war-talk. Mme. Lebel,
however, had no doubt revealed his presence in the studio, and he could
not risk offending Dastrey.

When he opened the door it was a surprise to see there, instead of
Dastrey’s anxious face, the round rosy countenance of a well-dressed
youth with a shock of fair hair above eyes of childish candour.

“Oh?come in,” Campton said, surprised, but divining a compatriot in a
difficulty.

The youth obeyed, blushing his apologies.

“I’m Benny Upsher, sir,” he said, in a tone modest yet confident, as if
the name were an introduction.

“Oh??” Campton stammered, cursing his absent-mindedness and his
unfailing faculty for forgetting names.

“You’re a friend of George’s, aren’t you?” he risked.

“Yes?tremendous. We were at Harvard together?he was two years ahead of
me.”

“Ah?then you’re still there?”

Mr. Upsher’s blush became a mask of crimson. “Well?I thought I was, till
this thing happened.”

“What thing?”

The youth stared at the older man with a look of celestial wonder.

“This war.?George has started already, hasn’t he?”

“Yes. Two hours ago.”

“So they said?I looked him up at the Crillon. I wanted most awfully to
see him; if I had, of course I shouldn’t have bothered you.”

“My dear young man, you’re not bothering me. But what can I do?”

Mr. Upsher’s composure seemed to be returning as the necessary
preliminaries were cleared away. “Thanks a lot,” he said. “Of course
what I’d like best is to join his regiment.”

“Join his regiment?_you_!” Campton exclaimed.

“Oh, I know it’s difficult; I raced up from Biarritz quick as I could to
catch him.” He seemed still to be panting with the effort. “I want to be
in this,” he concluded.

Campton contemplated him with helpless perplexity. “But I don’t
understand?there’s no reason, in your case. With George it was
obligatory?on account of his being born here. But I suppose you were
born in America?”

“Well, I guess so: in Utica. My mother was Madeline Mayhew. I think
we’re a sort of cousins, sir, aren’t we?”

“Of course?of course. Excuse my not recalling it?just at first. But, my
dear boy, I still don’t see??”

Mr. Upsher’s powers of stating his case were plainly limited. He pushed
back his rumpled hair, looked hard again at his cousin, and repeated
doggedly: “I want to be _in_ this.”

“This war?”

He nodded.

Campton groaned. What did the boy mean, and why come to him with such
tomfoolery? At that moment he felt even more unfitted than usual to deal
with practical problems, and in spite of the forgotten cousinship it was
no affair of his what Madeline Mayhew’s son wanted to be in.

But there was the boy himself, stolid, immovable, impenetrable to hints,
and with something in his wide blue eyes like George?and yet so
childishly different.

“Sit down?have a cigarette, won’t you??You know, of course,” Campton
began, “that what you propose is almost insuperably difficult?”

“Getting into George’s regiment?”

“Getting into the French army at all?for a foreigner, a neutral ... I’m
afraid there’s really nothing I can do.”

Benny Upsher smiled indulgently. “I can fix that up all right; getting
into the army, I mean. The only thing that might be hard would be
getting into his regiment.”

“Oh, as to that?out of the question, I should think.” Campton was
conscious of speaking curtly: the boy’s bland determination was
beginning to get on his nerves.

“Thank you no end,” said Benny Upsher, getting up. “Sorry to have butted
in,” he added, holding out a large brown hand.

Campton followed him to the door perplexedly. He knew that something
ought to be done?but what? On the threshold he laid his hand impulsively
on the youth’s shoulder. “Look here, my boy, we’re cousins, as you say,
and if you’re Madeline Mayhew’s boy you’re an only son. Moreover you’re
George’s friend?which matters still more to me. I can’t let you go like
this. Just let me say a word to you before??”

A gleam of shrewdness flashed through Benny Upsher’s inarticulate blue
eyes. “A word or two _against_, you mean? Why, it’s awfully kind, but
not the least earthly use. I guess I’ve heard all the arguments. But all
I see is that hulking bully trying to do Belgium in. England’s coming
in, ain’t she? Well, then why ain’t we?”

“England? Why?why, there’s no analogy??”

The young man groped for the right word. “I don’t know. Maybe not. Only
in tight places we always _do_ seem to stand together.”

“You’re mad?this is not our war. Do you really want to go out and
butcher people?”

“Yes?this kind of people,” said Benny Upsher cheerfully. “You see, I’ve
had all this talk from Uncle Harvey Mayhew a good many times on the way
over. We came out on the same boat: he wanted me to be his private
secretary at the Hague Congress. But I was pretty sure I’d have a job of
my own to attend to.”

Campton still contemplated him hopelessly. “Where is your uncle?” he
wondered.

Benny grinned. “On his way to the Hague, I suppose.”

“He ought to be here to look after you?some one ought to!”

“Then you don’t see your way to getting me into George’s regiment?”
Benny simply replied.

An hour later Campton still seemed to see him standing there, with
obstinate soft eyes repeating the same senseless question. It cost him
an effort to shake off the vision.

He returned to the Crillon to collect his possessions. On his table was
a telegram, and he seized it eagerly, wondering if by some mad chance
George’s plans were changed, if he were being sent back, if Fortin had
already arranged something....

He tore open the message, and read: “Utica July thirty-first. No news
from Benny please do all you can to facilitate his immediate return to
America dreadfully anxious your cousin Madeline Upsher.”

“Good Lord!” Campton groaned?“and I never even asked the boy’s address!”




                                BOOK II




                                   X


The war was three months old?three centuries.

By virtue of some gift of adaptation which seemed forever to discredit
human sensibility, people were already beginning to live into the
monstrous idea of it, acquire its ways, speak its language, regard it as
a thinkable, endurable, arrangeable fact; to eat it by day, and sleep on
it?yes, and soundly?at night.

The war went on; life went on; Paris went on. She had had her great hour
of resistance, when, alone, exposed and defenceless, she had held back
the enemy and broken his strength. She had had, afterward, her hour of
triumph, the hour of the Marne; then her hour of passionate and
prayerful hope, when it seemed to the watching nations that the enemy
was not only held back but thrust back, and victory finally in reach.
That hour had passed in its turn, giving way to the grey reality of the
trenches. A new speech was growing up in this new world. There were
trenches now, there was a “Front”?people were beginning to talk of their
sons at the front.

The first time John Campton heard the phrase it sent a shudder through
him. Winter was coming on, and he was haunted by the vision of the
youths out there, boys of George’s age, thousands and thousands of them,
exposed by day in reeking wet ditches and sleeping at night under the
rain and snow. People were talking calmly of victory in the spring?the
spring that was still six long months away! And meanwhile, what cold and
wet, what blood and agony, what shattered bodies out on that hideous
front, what shattered homes in all the lands it guarded!

Campton could bear to think of these things now. _His_ son was not at
the front?was safe, thank God, and likely to remain so!

During the first awful weeks of silence and uncertainty, when every
morning brought news of a fresh disaster, when no letters came from the
army and no private messages could reach it?during those weeks, while
Campton, like other fathers, was without news of his son, the war had
been to him simply a huge featureless mass crushing him earthward,
blinding him, letting him neither think nor move nor breathe.

But at last he had got permission to go to Chalons, whither Fortin, who
chanced to have begun his career as a surgeon, had been hastily
transferred. The physician, called from his incessant labours in a
roughly-improvised operating-room, to which Campton was led between rows
of stretchers laden with livid blood-splashed men, had said kindly, but
with a shade of impatience, that he had not forgotten, had done what he
could; that George’s health did not warrant his being discharged from
the army, but that he was temporarily on a staff-job at the rear, and
would probably be kept there if such and such influences were brought to
bear. Then, calling for hot water and fresh towels, the surgeon vanished
and Campton made his way back with lowered eyes between the stretchers.

The “influences” in question were brought to bear?not without Anderson
Brant’s assistance?and now that George was fairly certain to be kept at
clerical work a good many miles from the danger-zone Campton felt less
like an ant under a landslide, and was able for the first time to think
of the war as he might have thought of any other war: objectively,
intellectually, almost dispassionately, as of history in the making.

It was not that he had any doubt as to the rights and wrongs of the
case. The painfully preserved equilibrium of the neutrals made a pitiful
show now that the monstrous facts of the first weeks were known:
Germany’s diplomatic perfidy, her savagery in the field, her
premeditated and systematized terrorizing of the civil populations.
Nothing could efface what had been done in Belgium and Luxembourg, the
burning of Louvain, the bombardment of Rheims. These successive outrages
had roused in Campton the same incredulous wrath as in the rest of
mankind; but being of a speculative mind?and fairly sure now that George
would never lie in the mud and snow with the others?he had begun to
consider the landslide in its universal relations, as well as in its
effects on his private ant-heap.

His son’s situation, however, was still his central thought. That this
lad, who was meant to have been born three thousand miles away in his
own safe warless country, and who was regarded by the government of that
country as having been born there, as subject to her laws and entitled
to her protection?that this lad, by the most idiotic of blunders, a
blunder perpetrated before he was born, should have been dragged into a
conflict in which he was totally unconcerned, should become temporarily
and arbitrarily the subject of a foreign state, exposed to whatever
catastrophes that state might draw upon itself, this fact still seemed
to Campton as unjust as when it first dawned on him that his boy’s very
life might hang on some tortuous secret negotiation between the cabinets
of Europe.

He still refused to admit that France had any claim on George, any right
to his time, to his suffering or to his life. He had argued it out a
hundred times with Adele Anthony. “You say Julia and I were to blame for
not going home before the boy was born?and God knows I agree with you!
But suppose we’d meant to go? Suppose we’d made every arrangement, taken
every precaution, as my parents did in my own case, got to Havre or
Cherbourg, say, and been told the steamer had broken her screw?or been
prevented ourselves, at the last moment, by illness or accident, or any
sudden grab of the Hand of God? You’ll admit we shouldn’t have been to
blame for that; yet the law would have recognized no difference. George
would still have found himself a French soldier on the second of last
August because, by the same kind of unlucky accident, he and I were born
on the wrong side of the Atlantic. And I say that’s enough to prove it’s
an iniquitous law, a travesty of justice. Nobody’s going to convince me
that, because a steamer may happen to break a phlange of her screw at
the wrong time, or a poor woman be frightened by a thunderstorm, France
has the right to force an American boy to go and rot in the trenches.”

“In the trenches?is George in the trenches?” Adele Anthony asked,
raising her pale eyebrows.

“No.” Campton thundered, his fist crashing down among her tea things;
“and all your word-juggling isn’t going to convince me that he ought to
be there.” He paused and stared furiously about the little ladylike
drawing-room into which Miss Anthony’s sharp angles were so
incongruously squeezed. She made no answer, and he went on: “George
looks at the thing exactly as I do.”

“Has he told you so?” Miss Anthony enquired, rescuing his teacup and
putting sugar into her own.

“He has told me nothing to the contrary. You don’t seem to be aware that
military correspondence is censored, and that a soldier can’t always
blurt out everything he thinks.”

Miss Anthony followed his glance about the room, and her eyes paused
with his on her own portrait, now in the place of honour over the
mantelpiece, where it hung incongruously above a menagerie of china
animals and a collection of trophies from the Marne.

“I dropped in at the Luxembourg yesterday,” she said. “Do you know whom
I saw there? Anderson Brant. He was looking at George’s portrait, and
turned as red as a beet. You ought to do him a sketch of George some
day?after this.”

Campton’s face darkened. He knew it was partly through Brant’s influence
that George had been detached from his regiment and given a staff job in
the Argonne; but Miss Anthony’s reminder annoyed him. The Brants had
acted through sheer selfish cowardice, the desire to safeguard something
which belonged to them, something they valued as they valued their
pictures and tapestries, though of course in a greater degree; whereas
he, Campton, was sustained by a principle which he could openly avow,
and was ready to discuss with any one who had the leisure to listen.

He had explained all this so often to Miss Anthony that the words rose
again to his lips without an effort. “If it had been a national issue I
should have wanted him to be among the first: such as our having to
fight Mexico, for instance??”

“Yes; or the moon. For my part, I understand Julia and Anderson better.
They don’t care a fig for national issues; they’re just animals
defending their cub.”

“_Their_?thank you!” Campton exclaimed.

“Well, poor Anderson really _was_ a dry-nurse to the boy. Who else was
there to look after him? You were painting Spanish beauties at the
time.” She frowned. “Life’s a puzzle. I see perfectly that if you’d let
everything else go to keep George you’d never have become the great John
Campton: the _real_ John Campton you were meant to be. And it wouldn’t
have been half as satisfactory for you?or for George either. Only, in
the meanwhile, somebody had to blow the child’s nose, and pay his
dentist and doctor; and you ought to be grateful to Anderson for doing
it. Aren’t there bees or ants, or something, that are kept for such
purposes?”

Campton’s lips were opened to reply when her face changed, and he saw
that he had ceased to exist for her. He knew the reason. That look came
over everybody’s face nowadays at the hour when the evening paper came.
The old maid-servant brought it in, and lingered to hear the
_communique_. At that hour, everywhere over the globe, business and
labour and pleasure (if it still existed) were suspended for a moment
while the hearts of all men gathered themselves up in a question and a
prayer.

Miss Anthony sought for her _lorgnon_ and failed to find it. With a
shaking hand she passed the newspaper over to Campton.

“Violent enemy attacks in the region of Dixmude, Ypres, Armentieres,
Arras, in the Argonne, and on the advanced slopes of the Grand Couronne
de Nancy, have been successfully repulsed. We have taken back the
village of Soupir, near Vailly (Aisne); we have taken Maucourt and
Mogeville, to the northeast of Verdun. Progress has been made in the
region of Vermelles (Pas-de-Calais), south of Aix Noulette. Enemy
attacks in the Hauts-de-Meuse and southeast of Saint-Mihiel have also
been repulsed.

“In Poland the Austrian retreat is becoming general. The Russians are
still advancing in the direction of Kielce-Sandomir and have progressed
beyond the San in Galicia. Mlawa has been reoccupied, and the whole
railway system of Poland is now controlled by the Russian forces.”

A good day?oh, decidedly a good day. At this rate, what became of the
gloomy forecasts of the people who talked of a winter in the trenches,
to be followed by a spring campaign? True, the Serbian army was still
retreating before superior Austrian forces?but there too the scales
would soon be turned if the Russians continued to progress. That day
there was hope everywhere: the old maid-servant went away smiling, and
Miss Anthony poured out another cup of tea.

Campton had not lifted his eyes from the paper. Suddenly they lit on a
short paragraph: “Fallen on the Field of Honour.” One had got used to
that with the rest; used even to the pang of reading names one knew,
evoking familiar features, young faces blotted out in blood, young limbs
convulsed in the fires of that hell called “the Front.” But this time
Campton turned pale and the paper fell to his knee.

“Fortin-Lescluze; Jean-Jacques-Marie, lieutenant of _Chasseurs a Pied_,
gloriously fallen for France....” There followed a ringing citation.

Fortin’s son, his only son, was dead.

Campton saw before him the honest _bourgeois_ dining-room, so strangely
out of keeping with the rest of the establishment; he saw the late
August sun slanting in on the group about the table, on the ambitious
and unscrupulous great man, the two quiet women hidden under his
illustrious roof, and the youth who had held together these three
dissimilar people, making an invisible home in the heart of all that
publicity. Campton remembered his brief exchange of words with Fortin on
the threshold, and the father’s uncontrollable outburst: “For his mother
and myself it’s not a trifle?having our only son in the war.”

Campton shut his eyes and leaned back, sick with the memory. This man
had had a share in saving George; but his own son he could not save.

“What’s the matter?” Miss Anthony asked, her hand on his arm.

Campton could not bring the name to his lips. “Nothing?nothing. Only
this room’s rather hot?and I must be off anyhow.” He got up, escaping
from her solicitude, and made his way out. He must go at once to
Fortin’s for news. The physician was still at Chalons; but there would
surely be some one at the house, and Campton could at least leave a
message and ask where to write.

Dusk had fallen. His eyes usually feasted on the beauty of the new
Paris, the secret mysterious Paris of veiled lights and deserted
streets; but to-night he was blind to it. He could see nothing but
Fortin’s face, hear nothing but his voice when he said: “Our only son in
the war.”

He groped along the pitch-black street for the remembered outline of the
house (since no house-numbers were visible), and rang several times
without result. He was just turning away when a big mud-splashed motor
drove up. He noticed a soldier at the steering-wheel, then three people
got out stiffly: two women smothered in crape and a haggard man in a
dirty uniform. Campton stopped, and Fortin-Lescluze recognized him by
the light of the motor-lamp. The four stood and looked at each other.
The old mother, under her crape, appeared no bigger than a child.

“Ah?you know?” the doctor said. Campton nodded.

The father spoke in a firm voice. “It happened three days ago?at
Suippes. You’ve seen his citation? They brought him in to me at Chalons
without a warning?and too late. I took off both legs, but gangrene had
set in. Ah?if I could have got hold of one of our big surgeons.... Yes,
we’re just back from the funeral.... My mother and my wife ... they had
that comfort....”

The two women stood beside him like shrouded statues. Suddenly Mme.
Fortin’s deep voice came through the crape: “You saw him, Monsieur, that
last day ... the day you came about your own son, I think?”

“I ... yes....” Campton stammered in anguish.

The physician intervened. “And, now, _ma bonne mere_, you’re not to be
kept standing. You’re to go straight in and take your _tisane_ and go to
bed.” He kissed his mother and pushed her into his wife’s arms.
“Goodbye, my dear. Take care of her.”

The women vanished under the porte-cochere, and Fortin turned to the
painter.

“Thank you for coming. I can’t ask you in?I must go back immediately.”

“Back?”

“To my work. Thank God. If it were not for that??”

He jumped into the motor, called out “_En route_,” and was absorbed into
the night.




                                   XI


Campton went home to his studio.

He still lived there, shiftlessly and uncomfortably?for Mariette had
never come back from Lille. She had not come back, and there was no news
of her. Lille had become a part of the “occupied provinces,” from which
there was no escape; and people were beginning to find out what that
living burial meant.

Adele Anthony had urged Campton to go back to the hotel, but he
obstinately refused. What business had he to be living in expensive
hotels when, for the Lord knew how long, his means of earning a
livelihood were gone, and when it was his duty to save up for
George?George, who was safe, who was definitely out of danger, and whom
he longed more than ever, when the war was over, to withdraw from the
stifling atmosphere of his stepfather’s millions?

He had been so near to having the boy to himself when the war broke out!
He had almost had in sight the proud day when he should be able to say:
“Look here: this is your own bank-account. Now you’re independent?for
God’s sake stop and consider what you want to do with your life.”

The war had put an end to that?but only for a time. If victory came
before long, Campton’s reputation would survive the eclipse, his chances
of money-making would be as great as ever, and the new George, the
George matured and disciplined by war, would come back with a finer
sense of values, and a soul steeled against the vulgar opportunities of
wealth.

Meanwhile, it behoved his father to save every penny. And the simplest
way of saving was to go on camping in the studio, taking his meals at
the nearest wine-shop, and entrusting his bed-making and dusting to old
Mme. Lebel. In that way he could live for a long time without
appreciably reducing his savings.

Mme. Lebel’s daughter-in-law, Mme. Jules, who was in the Ardennes with
the little girl when the war broke out, was to have replaced Mariette.
But, like Mariette, Mme. Jules never arrived, and no word came from her
or the child. They too were in an occupied province. So Campton jogged
on without a servant. It was very uncomfortable, even for his lax
standards; but the dread of letting a stranger loose in the studio made
him prefer to put up with Mme. Lebel’s intermittent services.

So far she had borne up bravely. Her orphan grandsons were all at the
front (how that word had insinuated itself into the language!) but she
continued to have fairly frequent reassuring news of them. The _Chasseur
Alpin_, slightly wounded in Alsace, was safe in hospital; and the others
were well, and wrote cheerfully. Her son Jules, the cabinetmaker, was
guarding a bridge at St. Cloud, and came in regularly to see her; but
Campton noticed that it was about him that she seemed most anxious.

He was a silent industrious man, who had worked hard to support his
orphaned nephews and his mother, and had married in middle age, only
four or five years before the war, when the lads could shift for
themselves, and his own situation was secure enough to permit the luxury
of a wife and baby.

Mme. Jules had waited patiently for him, though she had other chances;
and finally they had married and the baby had been born, and blossomed
into one of those finished little Frenchwomen who, at four or five, seem
already to be musing on the great central problems of love and thrift.
The parents used to bring the child to see Campton, and he had made a
celebrated sketch of her, in her Sunday bonnet, with little earrings and
a wise smile. And these two, mother and child, had disappeared on the
second of August as completely as if the earth had opened and swallowed
them.

As Campton entered he glanced at the old woman’s den, saw that it was
empty, and said to himself: “She’s at St. Cloud again.” For he knew that
she seized every chance of being with her eldest.

He unlocked his door and felt his way into the dark studio. Mme. Lebel
might at least have made up the fire! Campton lit the lamp, found some
wood, and knelt down stiffly by the stove. Really, life was getting too
uncomfortable....

He was trying to coax a flame when the door opened and he heard Mme.
Lebel.

“Really, you know??” he turned to rebuke her; but the words died on his
lips. She stood before him, taking no notice; then her shapeless black
figure doubled up, and she sank down into his own armchair. Mme. Lebel,
who, even when he offered her a seat, never did more than rest
respectful knuckles on its back!

“What’s the matter? What’s wrong?” he exclaimed.

She lifted her aged face. “Monsieur, I came about your fire; but I am
too unhappy. I have more than I can bear.” She fumbled vainly for a
handkerchief, and wiped away her tears with the back of her old
laborious hand.

“Jules has enlisted, Monsieur; enlisted in the infantry. He has left for
the front without telling me.”

“Good Lord. Enlisted? At his age?is he crazy?”

“No, Monsieur. But the little girl?he’s had news??”

She waited to steady her voice, and then fishing in another slit of her
multiple skirts, pulled out a letter. “I got that at midday. I hurried
to St. Cloud?but he left yesterday.”

The letter was grim reading. The poor father had accidentally run across
an escaped prisoner who had regained the French lines near the village
where Mme. Jules and the child were staying. The man, who knew the
wife’s family, had been charged by them with a message to the effect
that Mme. Jules, who was a proud woman, had got into trouble with the
authorities, and been sent off to a German prison on the charge of
spying. The poor little girl had cried and clung to her mother, and had
been so savagely pushed aside by the officer who made the arrest that
she had fallen on the stone steps of the “Kommandantur” and fractured
her skull. The fugitive reported her as still alive, but unconscious,
and dying.

Jules Lebel had received this news the previous day; and within
twenty-four hours he was at the front. Guard a bridge at St. Cloud after
that? All he asked was to kill and be killed. He knew the name and the
regiment of the officer who had denounced his wife. “If I live long
enough I shall run the swine down,” he wrote. “If not, I’ll kill as many
of his kind as God lets me.”

Mme. Lebel sat silent, her head bowed on her hands; and Campton stood
and watched her. Presently she got up, passed the back of her hand
across her eyes, and said: “The room is cold. I’ll fetch some coal.”

Campton protested. “No, no, Mme. Lebel. Don’t worry about me. Make
yourself something warm to drink, and try to sleep??”

“Oh, Monsieur, thank God for the work! If it were not for that??” she
said, in the same words as the physician.

She hobbled away, and presently he heard her bumping up again with the
coal.

When his fire was started, and the curtains drawn, and she had left him,
the painter sat down and looked about the studio. Bare and untidy as it
was, he did not find the sight unpleasant: he was used to it, and being
used to things seemed to him the first requisite of comfort. But
to-night his thoughts were elsewhere: he saw neither the tattered
tapestries with their huge heroes and kings, nor the blotched walls hung
with pictures, nor the canvases stacked against the chair-legs, nor the
long littered table at which he wrote and ate and mixed his colours. At
one moment he was with Fortin-Lescluze, speeding through the night
toward fresh scenes of death; at another, in the _loge_ downstairs,
where Mme. Lebel, her day’s work done, would no doubt sit down as usual
by her smoky lamp and go on with her sewing. “Thank God for the work??”
they had both said.

And here Campton sat with idle hands, and did nothing??

It was not exactly his fault. What was there for a portrait-painter to
do? He was not a portrait-painter only, and on his brief trip to Chalons
some of the scenes by the way?gaunt unshorn faces of territorials at
railway bridges, soldiers grouped about a provision-lorry, a
mud-splashed company returning to the rear, a long grey train of
“seventy-fives” ploughing forward through the rain?at these sights the
old graphic instinct had stirred in him. But the approaches of the front
were sternly forbidden to civilians, and especially to neutrals (Campton
was beginning to wince at the word); he himself, who had been taken to
Chalons by a high official of the Army Medical Board, had been given
only time enough for his interview with Fortin, and brought back to
Paris the same night. If ever there came a time for art to interpret the
war, as Raffet, for instance, had interpreted Napoleon’s campaigns, the
day was not yet; the world in which men lived at present was one in
which the word “art” had lost its meaning.

And what was Campton, what had he ever been, but an artist?... A father;
yes, he had waked up to the practice of that other art, he was learning
to be a father. And now, at a stroke, his only two reasons for living
were gone: since the second of August he had had no portraits to paint,
no son to guide and to companion.

Other people, he knew, had found jobs: most of his friends had been
drawn into some form of war-work. Dastrey, after vain attempts to
enlist, thwarted by an untimely sciatica, had found a post near the
front, on the staff of a Red Cross Ambulance. Adele Anthony was working
eight or nine hours a day in a Depot which distributed food and clothing
to refugees from the invaded provinces; and Mrs. Brant’s name figured on
the committees of most of the newly-organized war charities. Among
Campton’s other friends many had accepted humbler tasks. Some devoted
their time to listing and packing hospital supplies, keeping accounts in
ambulance offices, sorting out refugees at the railway-stations, and
telling them where to go for food and help; still others spent their
days, and sometimes their nights, at the bitter-cold suburban sidings
where the long train-loads of wounded stopped on the way to the
hospitals of the interior. There was enough misery and confusion at the
rear for every civilian volunteer to find his task.

Among them all, Campton could not see his place. His lameness put him at
a disadvantage, since taxicabs were few, and it was difficult for him to
travel in the crowded metro. He had no head for figures, and would have
thrown the best-kept accounts into confusion; he could not climb steep
stairs to seek out refugees, nor should he have known what to say to
them when he reached their attics. And so it would have been at the
railway canteens; he choked with rage and commiseration at all the
suffering about him, but found no word to cheer the sufferers.

Secretly, too, he feared the demands that would be made on him if he
once let himself be drawn into the network of war charities. Tiresome
women would come and beg for money, or for pictures for bazaars: they
were already getting up bazaars.

Money he could not spare, since it was his duty to save it for George;
and as for pictures?why, there were a few sketches he might give, but
here again he was checked by his fear of establishing a precedent. He
had seen in the papers that the English painters were already giving
blank canvases to be sold by auction to millionaires in quest of a
portrait. But that form of philanthropy would lead to his having to
paint all the unpaintable people who had been trying to bribe a picture
out of him since his sudden celebrity. No artist had a right to cheapen
his art in that way: it could only result in his turning out work that
would injure his reputation and reduce his sales after the war.

So far, Campton had not been troubled by many appeals for help; but that
was probably because he had kept out of sight, and thrown into the fire
the letters of the few ladies who had begged a sketch for their sales,
or his name for their committees.

One appeal, however, he had not been able to avoid. About two months
earlier he had had a visit from George’s friend Boylston, the youth he
had met at Dastrey’s dinner the night before war was declared. In the
interval he had entirely forgotten Boylston; but as soon as he saw the
fat brown young man with a twinkle in his eyes and his hair, Campton
recalled him, and held out a cordial hand. Had not George said that
Boylston was the best fellow he knew?

Boylston seemed much impressed by the honour of waiting on the great
man. In spite of his cool twinkling air he was evidently full of
reverence for the things and people he esteemed, and Campton’s welcome
sent the blood up to the edge of his tight curls. It also gave him
courage to explain his visit.

He had come to beg Campton to accept the chairmanship of the American
Committee of “The Friends of French Art,” an international group of
painters who proposed to raise funds for the families of mobilised
artists. The American group would naturally be the most active, since
Americans had, in larger numbers than any other foreigners, sought
artistic training in France; and all the members agreed that Campton’s
name must figure at their head. But Campton was known to be
inaccessible, and the committee, aware that Boylston was a friend of
George’s, had asked him to transmit their request.

“You see, sir, nobody else represents....”

Campton thought as seldom as possible of what followed: he hated the
part he had played. But, after all, what else could he have done?
Everything in him recoiled from what acceptance would bring with it:
publicity, committee meetings, speechifying, writing letters, seeing
troublesome visitors, hearing harrowing stories, asking people for
money?above all, having to give his own; a great deal of his own.

He stood before the young man, abject, irresolute, chinking a bunch of
keys in his trouser-pocket, and remembering afterward that the chink
must have sounded as if it were full of money. He remembered too, oddly
enough, that as his own embarrassment increased Boylston’s vanished. It
was as though the modest youth, taking his host’s measure, had
reluctantly found him wanting, and from that moment had felt less in awe
of his genius. Illogical, of course, and unfair?but there it was.

The talk had ended by Campton’s refusing the chairmanship, but agreeing
to let his name figure on the list of honorary members, where he hoped
it would be overshadowed by rival glories. And, having reached this
conclusion, he had limped to his desk, produced a handful of notes, and
after a moment’s hesitation held out two hundred francs with the
stereotyped: “Sorry I can’t make it more....”

He had meant it to be two hundred and fifty; but, with his usual luck,
all his fumbling had failed to produce a fifty-franc note; and he could
hardly ask Boylston to “make the change.”

On the threshold the young man paused to ask for the last news of
George; and on Campton’s assuring him that it was excellent, added, with
evident sincerity: “Still hung up on that beastly staff-job? I do call
that hard luck??” And now, of all the unpleasant memories of the visit,
that phrase kept the sharpest sting.

Was it in fact hard luck? And did George himself think so? There was
nothing in his letters to show it. He seemed to have undergone no change
of view as to his own relation to the war; he had shown no desire to “be
in it,” as that mad young Upsher said.

For the first time since he had seen George’s train pull out of the Gare
de l’Est Campton found himself wondering at the perfection of his son’s
moral balance. So many things had happened since; war had turned out to
be so immeasurably more hideous and abominable than those who most
abhorred war had dreamed it could be; the issues at stake had become so
glaringly plain, right and wrong, honour and dishonour, humanity and
savagery faced each other so squarely across the trenches, that it
seemed strange to Campton that his boy, so eager, so impressionable, so
quick on the uptake, should not have felt some such burst of wrath as
had driven even poor Jules Lebel into the conflict.

The comparison, of course, was absurd. Lebel had been parted from his
dearest, his wife dragged to prison, his child virtually murdered: any
man, in his place, must have felt the blind impulse to kill. But what
was Lebel’s private plight but a symbol of the larger wrong? This war
could no longer be compared to other wars: Germany was conducting it on
methods that civilization had made men forget. The occupation of
Luxembourg; the systematic destruction of Belgium; the savage treatment
of the people of the invaded regions; the outrages of Louvain and Rheims
and Ypres; the voice with which these offences cried to heaven had waked
the indignation of humanity. Yet George, in daily contact with all this
woe and ruin, seemed as unmoved as though he had been behind a desk in
the New York office of Bullard and Brant.

If there were any change in his letters it was rather that they were
more indifferent. His reports of himself became drier, more stereotyped,
his comments on the situation fewer: he seemed to have been subdued to
the hideous business he worked in. It was true that his letters had
never been expressive: his individuality seemed to dry up in contact
with pen and paper. It was true also that letters from the front were
severely censored, and that it would have been foolish to put in them
anything likely to prevent their delivery. But George had managed to
send several notes by hand, and these were as colourless as the others;
and so were his letters to his mother, which Mrs. Brant always sent to
Miss Anthony, who privately passed them on to Campton.

Besides, there were other means of comparison. People with sons at the
front were beginning to hand about copies of their letters; a few
passages, strangely moving and beautiful, had found their way into the
papers. George, God be praised, was not at the front; but he was in the
war-zone, far nearer the sights and sounds of death than his father, and
he had comrades and friends in the trenches. Strange that what he wrote
was still so cold to the touch....

“It’s the scientific mind, I suppose,” Campton reflected. “These
youngsters are all rather like beautifully made machines....” Yet it had
never before struck him that his son was like a beautifully made
machine.

He remembered that he had not dined, and got up wearily. As he passed
out he noticed on a pile of letters and papers a brand-new card: he
could always tell the new cards by their whiteness, which twenty-four
hours of studio-dust turned to grey.

Campton held the card to the light. It was large and glossy, a beautiful
thick pre-war card; and on it was engraved:

                             HARVEY MAYHEW
             _Delegue des Etats Unis au Congres de la Paix_

with a pen-stroke through the lower line. Beneath was written an
imperative “p.t.o.”; and reversing the card, Campton read, in an
agitated hand: “Must see you at once. Call up Nouveau Luxe”; and, lower
down: “Excuse ridiculous card. Impossible get others under six weeks.”

So Mayhew had turned up! Well, it was a good thing: perhaps he might
bring news of that mad Benny Upsher whose doings had caused Campton so
much trouble in the early days that he could never recall the boy’s
obstinate rosy face without a stir of irritation.

“I want to be _in_ this thing??” Well, young Upsher had apparently been
in it with a vengeance; but what he had cost Campton in cables to his
distracted family, and in weary pilgrimages to the War Office, the
American Embassy, the Consulate, the Prefecture of Police, and divers
other supposed sources of information, the painter meant some day to
tell his young relative in no measured terms. That is, if the chance
ever presented itself; for, since he had left the studio that morning
four months ago, Benny had so completely vanished that Campton sometimes
wondered, with a little shiver, if they were ever likely to exchange
words again in this world.

“Mayhew will know; he wants to tell me about the boy, I suppose,” he
mused.

Harvey Mayhew?Harvey Mayhew with a pen-stroke through the title which,
so short a time since, it had been his chief ambition to display on his
cards! No wonder it embarrassed him now. But where on earth had he been
all this time? As Campton pondered on the card a memory flashed out.
Mayhew? Mayhew? Why, wasn’t it Mayhew who had waylaid him in the Crillon
a few hours before war was declared, to ask his advice about the safest
way of travelling to the Hague? And hadn’t he, Campton, in all good
faith, counselled him to go by Luxembourg “in order to be out of the way
of trouble”?

The remembrance swept away the painter’s sombre thoughts, and he burst
into a laugh that woke the echoes of the studio.




                                  XII


Not having it in his power to call up his cousin on the telephone,
Campton went the next morning to the Nouveau Luxe.

It was the first time that he had entered the famous hotel since the
beginning of the war; and at sight of the long hall his heart sank as it
used to whenever some untoward necessity forced him to run its deadly
blockade.

But the hall was empty when he entered, empty not only of the brilliant
beings who filled his soul with such dismay, but also of the porters,
footmen and lift-boys who, even in its unfrequented hours, lent it the
lustre of their liveries.

A tired concierge sat at the desk, and near the door a boy scout,
coiling his bare legs about a high stool, raised his head languidly from
his book. But for these two, the world of the Nouveau Luxe had
disappeared.

As the lift was not running there was nothing to disturb their
meditations; and when Campton had learned that Mr. Mayhew would receive
him he started alone up the deserted stairs.

Only a few dusty trunks remained in the corridors where luggage used to
be piled as high as in the passages of the great liners on sailing-day;
and instead of the murmur of ladies’-maids’ skirts, and explosions of
laughter behind glazed service-doors, the swish of a charwoman’s mop
alone broke the silence.

“After all,” Campton thought, “if war didn’t kill people how much
pleasanter it might make the world!”

This was evidently not the opinion of Mr. Harvey Mayhew, whom he found
agitatedly pacing a large room hung in shrimp-pink brocade, which opened
on a vista of turquoise tiling and porcelain tub.

Mr. Mayhew’s round countenance, composed of the same simple curves as
his nephew’s, had undergone a remarkable change. He was still round, but
he was ravaged. His fringe of hair had grown greyer, and there were
crow’s-feet about his blue eyes, and wrathful corrugations in his
benignant forehead.

He seized Campton’s hands and glared at him through indignant
eye-glasses.

“My dear fellow, I looked you up as soon as I arrived. I need you?we all
need you?we need your powerful influence and your world-wide celebrity.
Campton, the day for words has gone by. We must _act_!”

Campton let himself down into an armchair. No verb in the language
terrified him as much as that which his cousin had flung at him. He
gazed at the ex-Delegate with dismay. “I didn’t know you were here.
Where have you come from?” he asked.

Mr. Mayhew, resting a manicured hand on the edge of a gilt table, looked
down awfully on him.

“I come,” he said, “from a German prison.”

“Good Lord?_you_?” Campton gasped.

He continued to gaze at his cousin with terror, but of a new kind. Here
at last was someone who had actually been in the jaws of the monster,
who had seen, heard, suffered?a witness who could speak of that which he
knew! No wonder Mr. Mayhew took himself seriously?at last he had
something to be serious about! Campton stared at him as if he had risen
from the dead.

Mr. Mayhew cleared his throat and went on: “You may remember our meeting
at the Crillon?on the 31st of last July it was?and my asking you the
best way of getting to the Hague, in view of impending events. At that
time” (his voice took a note of irony) “I was a Delegate to the Peace
Congress at the Hague, and conceived it to be my duty to carry out my
mandate at whatever personal risk. You advised me?as you may also
remember?in order to be out of the way of trouble, to travel by
Luxembourg,” (Campton stirred uneasily). “I followed your advice; and,
not being able to go by train, I managed, with considerable difficulty,
to get permission to travel by motor. I reached Luxembourg as the German
army entered it?the next day I was in a German prison.”

The next day! Then this pink-and-white man who stood there with his
rimless eye-glasses and neatly trimmed hair, and his shining nails
reflected in the plate glass of the table-top, this perfectly typical,
usual sort of harmless rich American, had been for four months in the
depths of the abyss that men were beginning to sound with fearful
hearts!

“It is a simple miracle,” said Mr. Mayhew, “that I was not shot as a
spy.”

Campton’s voice choked in his throat. “Where were you imprisoned?”

“The first night, in the Police commissariat, with common thieves and
vagabonds?with?” Mr. Mayhew lowered his voice and his eyes: “With
prostitutes, Campton....”

He waited for this to take effect, and continued: “The next day, in
consequence of the energetic intervention of our consul?who behaved
extremely well, as I have taken care to let them know in Washington?I
was sent back to my hotel on parole, and kept there, kept there,
Campton?_I_, the official representative of a friendly country?under
strict police surveillance, like ... like an unfortunate woman ... for
eight days: a week and one day over!”

Mr. Mayhew sank into a chair and passed a scented handkerchief across
his forehead. “When I was finally released I was without money, without
luggage, without my motor or my wretched chauffeur?a Frenchman, who had
been instantly carried off to Germany. In this state of destitution, and
without an apology, I was shipped to Rotterdam and put on a steamer
sailing for America.” He wiped his forehead again, and the corners of
his agitated lips. “Peace, Campton?_Peace_? When I think that I believed
in a thing called Peace! That I left Utica?always a difficult
undertaking for me?because I deemed it my duty, in the interests of
_Peace_,” (the word became a hiss) “to travel to the other side of the
world, and use the weight of my influence and my experience in such a
cause!”

He clenched his fist and shook it in the face of an invisible foe.

“My influence, if I have any; my experience?ha, I _have_ had experience
now, Campton! And, my God, sir, they shall both be used till my last
breath to show up these people, to proclaim to the world what they
really are, to rouse public opinion in America against a nation of
savages who ought to be hunted off the face of the globe like
vermin?like the vermin in their own prison cells! Campton?if I may say
so without profanity?I come to bring not Peace but a Sword!”

It was some time before the flood of Mr. Mayhew’s wrath subsided, or
before there floated up from its agitated depths some fragments of his
subsequent history and present intentions. Eventually, however, Campton
gathered that after a short sojourn in America, where he found opinion
too lukewarm for him, he had come back to Europe to collect the
experiences of other victims of German savagery. Mr. Mayhew, in short,
meant to devote himself to Atrocities; and he had sought out Campton to
ask his help, and especially to be put in contact with persons engaged
in refugee-work, and likely to have come across flagrant offences
against the law of nations.

It was easy to comply with the latter request. Campton scribbled a
message to Adele Anthony at her refugee Depot; and he undertook also to
find out from what officials Mr. Mayhew might obtain leave to visit the
front.

“I know it’s difficult??” he began; but Mr. Mayhew laughed. “I am here
to surmount difficulties?after what I’ve been through!”

It was not until then that Mr. Mayhew found time to answer an enquiry
about his nephew.

“Benny Upsher ? Ha?I’m proud of Benny! He’s a hero, that nephew of
mine?he was always my favourite.”

He went on to say that the youth, having failed to enlist in the French
army, had managed to get back to England, and there, passing himself off
as a Canadian (“Born at Murray Bay, sir?wasn’t it lucky?”) had joined an
English regiment, and, after three months’ training, was now on his way
to the front. His parents had made a great outcry?moved heaven and earth
for news of him?but the boy had covered up his tracks so cleverly that
they had had no word till he was starting for Boulogne with his draft.
Rather high-handed?and poor Madeline had nearly gone out of her mind;
but Mr. Mayhew confessed he had no patience with such feminine weakness.
“Benny’s a man, and must act as a man. That boy, Campton, saw things as
they were from the first.”

Campton took leave, dazed and crushed by the conversation. It was all
one to him if Harvey Mayhew chose to call on America to avenge his
wrongs; Campton himself was beginning to wish that his country would
wake up to what was going on in the world; but that he, Campton, should
be drawn into the affair, should have to write letters, accompany the
ex-Delegate to Embassies and Red Crosses, languish with him in
ministerial antechambers, and be deafened with appeals to his own
celebrity and efficiency; that he should have ascribed to himself that
mysterious gift of “knowing the ropes” in which his whole blundering
career had proved him to be cruelly lacking: this was so dreadful to him
as to obscure every other question.

“Thank the Lord,” he muttered, “I haven’t got the telephone anyhow!”

He glanced cautiously down the wide stairs of the hotel to assure
himself of a safe retreat; but in the hall an appealing voice detained
him.

“Dear Master! Dear great Master! I’ve been lying in wait for you!”

A Red Cross nurse advanced: not the majestic figure of the Crimean
legend, but the new version evolved in the rue de la Paix: short skirts,
long ankles, pearls and curls. The face under the coif was young,
wistful, haggard with the perpetual hurry of the aimless. Where had he
seen those tragic eyes, so full of questions and so invariably
uninterested in the answers?

“I’m Madge Talkett?I saw you at?I saw you the day war was declared,” the
young lady corrected herself. Campton remembered their meeting at Mrs.
Brant’s, and was grateful for her evident embarrassment. So few of the
new generation seemed aware that there were any privacies left to
respect! He looked at Mrs. Talkett more kindly.

“You _must_ come,” she continued, laying her hand on his arm (her
imperatives were always in italics). “Just a step from here?to my
hospital. There’s someone asking for you.”

“For me? Someone wounded?” What if it were Benny Upsher? A cold fear
broke over Campton.

“Someone dying,” Mrs. Talkett said. “Oh, nobody you know?a poor young
French soldier. He was brought here two days ago ... and he keeps on
repeating your name....”

“My name? Why my name?”

“We don’t know. We don’t think he knows you ... but he’s shot to pieces
and half delirious. He’s a painter, and he’s seen pictures of yours, and
keeps talking about them, and saying he wants you to look at his.... You
_will_ come? It’s just next door, you know.”

He did not know?having carefully avoided all knowledge of hospitals in
his dread of being drawn into war-work, and his horror of coming as a
mere spectator to gaze on agony he could neither comfort nor relieve.
Hospitals were for surgeons and women; if he had been rich he would have
given big sums to aid them; being unable to do even that, he preferred
to keep aloof.

He followed Mrs. Talkett out of the hotel and around the corner. The
door of another hotel, with a big Red Cross above it, admitted them to a
marble vestibule full of the cold smell of disinfectants. An orderly sat
reading a newspaper behind the desk, and nurses whisked backward and
forward with trays and pails. A lady with a bunch of flowers came down
the stairs drying her eyes.

Campton’s whole being recoiled from what awaited him. Since the poor
youth was delirious, what was the use of seeing him? But women took a
morbid pleasure in making one do things that were useless!

On an upper floor they paused at a door where there was a moment’s
parleying.

“Come,” Mrs. Talkett said; “he’s a little better.”

The room contained two beds. In one lay a haggard elderly man with
closed eyes and lips drawn back from his clenched teeth. His legs
stirred restlessly, and one of his arms was in a lifted sling attached
to a horrible kind of gallows above the bed. It reminded Campton of Juan
de Borgona’s pictures of the Inquisition, in the Prado.

“Oh, _he’s_ all right; he’ll get well. It’s the other....”

The other lay quietly in his bed. No gallows overhung him, no visible
bandaging showed his wound. There was a flush on his young cheeks and
his eyes looked out, large and steady, from their hollow brows. But he
was the one who would not get well.

Mrs. Talkett bent over him: her voice was sweet when it was lowered.

“I’ve kept my promise. Here he is.”

The eyes turned in the lad’s immovable head, and he and Campton looked
at each other. The painter had never seen the face before him: a sharp
irregular face, prematurely hollowed by pain, with thick chestnut hair
tumbled above the forehead.

“It’s you, Master!” the boy said.

Campton sat down beside him. “How did you know? Have you seen me
before?”

“Once?at one of your exhibitions.” He paused and drew a hard breath.
“But the first thing was the portrait at the Luxembourg ... your
son....”

“Ah, you look like him!” Campton broke out.

The eyes of the young soldier lit up. “Do I?... Someone told me he was
your son. I went home from seeing that and began to paint. After the
war, would you let me come and work with you? My things ... wait ...
I’ll show you my things first.” He tried to raise himself. Mrs. Talkett
slipped her arm under his shoulders, and resting against her he lifted
his hand and pointed to the bare wall facing him.

“There?there; you see? Look for yourself. The brushwork ... not too bad,
eh? I was ... getting it.... There, that head of my grandfather, eh? And
my lame sister.... Oh, I’m young ...” he smiled ... “never had any
models.... But after the war you’ll see....”

Mrs. Talkett let him down again, and feverishly, vehemently, he began to
describe, one by one, and over and over again, the pictures he saw on
the naked wall in front of him.

A nurse had slipped in, and Mrs. Talkett signed to Campton to follow her
out. The boy seemed aware that the painter was going, and interrupted
his enumeration to say: “As soon as the war’s over you’ll let me come?”

“Of course I will,” Campton promised.

In the passage he asked: “Can nothing save him? Has everything possible
been done?”

“Everything. We’re all so fond of him?the biggest surgeons have seen
him. It seems he has great talent?but he never could afford models, so
he has painted his family over and over again.” Mrs. Talkett looked at
Campton with a good deal of feeling in her changing eyes. “You see, it
_did_ help, your coming. I know you thought it tiresome of me to
insist.” She led him downstairs and into the office, where a lame
officer with the Croix de Guerre sat at the desk. The officer wrote out
the young soldier’s name?Rene Davril?and his family’s address.

“They’re quite destitute, Monsieur. An old infirm grandfather, a lame
sister who taught music, a widowed mother and several younger
children....”

“I’ll come back, I’ll come back,” Campton again promised as he parted
from Mrs. Talkett.

He had not thought it possible that he would ever feel so kindly toward
her as at that moment. And then, a second later, she nearly spoiled it
by saying: “Dear Master?you see the penalty of greatness!”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The name of Rene Davril was with Campton all day. The boy had believed
in him?his eyes had been opened by the sight of George’s portrait! And
now, in a day or two more, he would be filling a three-by-six ditch in a
crowded graveyard. At twenty?and with eyes like George’s.

What could Campton do? No one was less visited by happy inspirations;
the “little acts of kindness” recommended to his pious infancy had
always seemed to him far harder to think of than to perform. But now
some instinct carried him straight to the corner of his studio where he
remembered having shoved out of sight a half-finished study for George’s
portrait. He found it, examined it critically, scribbled his signature
in one corner, and set out with it for the hospital. On the way he had
to stop at the Ministry of War on Mayhew’s tiresome business, and was
delayed there till too late to proceed with his errand before luncheon.
But in the afternoon he passed in again through the revolving plate
glass, and sent up his name. Mrs. Talkett was not there, but a nurse
came down, to whom, with embarrassment, he explained himself.

“Poor little Davril? Yes?he’s still alive. Will you come up? His family
are with him.”

Campton shook his head and held out the parcel. “It’s a picture he
wanted??”

The nurse promised it should be given. She looked at Campton with a
vague benevolence, having evidently never heard his name; and the
painter turned away with a cowardly sense that he ought to have taken
the picture up himself. But to see the death-change on a face so like
his son’s, and its look reflected in other anguished faces, was more
than he could endure. He turned away.

The next morning Mrs. Talkett wrote that Rene Davril was better, that
the fever had dropped, and that he was lying quietly looking at the
sketch. “The only thing that troubles him is that he realizes now that
you have not seen his pictures. But he is very happy, and blesses you
for your goodness.”

His goodness! Campton, staring at the letter, could only curse himself
for his stupidity. He saw now that the one thing which might have
comforted the poor lad would have been to have his own pictures seen and
judged; and that one thing, he, Campton, so many years vainly athirst
for the approbation of the men he revered?that one thing he had never
thought of doing! The only way of atoning for his negligence was
instantly to go out to the suburb where the Davril family lived.
Campton, without a scruple, abandoned Mr. Mayhew, with whom he had an
appointment at the Embassy and another at the War Office, and devoted
the rest of the day to the expedition. It was after six when he reached
the hospital again; and when Mrs. Talkett came down he went up to her
impetuously.

“Well?I’ve seen them; I’ve seen his pictures, and he’s right. They’re
astonishing! Awkward, still, and hesitating; but with such a sense of
air and mass. He’ll do things?May I go up and tell him?”

He broke off and looked at her.

“He died an hour ago. If only you’d seen them yesterday!” she said.




                                  XIII


The killing of Rene Davril seemed to Campton one of the most senseless
crimes the war had yet perpetrated. It brought home to him, far more
vividly than the distant death of poor Jean Fortin, what an incalculable
sum of gifts and virtues went to make up the monster’s daily meal.

“Ah, you want genius, do you? Mere youth’s not enough ... and health and
gaiety and courage; you want brains in the bud, imagination and poetry,
ideas all folded up in their sheath! It takes that, does it, to tempt
your jaded appetite?” He was reminded of the rich vulgarians who will
eat only things out of season. “That’s what war is like,” he muttered
savagely to himself.

The next morning he went to the funeral with Mrs. Talkett?between whom
and himself the tragic episode had created a sort of improvised
intimacy?walking at her side through the November rain, behind the poor
hearse with the tricolour over it.

At the church, while the few mourners shivered in a damp side chapel, he
had time to study the family: a poor sobbing mother, two anæmic little
girls, and the lame sister who was musical?a piteous group, smelling of
poverty and tears. Behind them, to his surprise, he saw the curly brown
head and short-sighted eyes of Boylston. Campton wondered at the
latter’s presence; then he remembered “The Friends of French Art,” and
concluded that the association had probably been interested in poor
Davril.

With some difficulty he escaped from the thanks of the mother and
sisters, and picked up a taxi to take Mrs. Talkett home.

“No?back to the hospital,” she said. “A lot of bad cases have come in,
and I’m on duty again all day.” She spoke as if it were the most natural
thing in the world; and he shuddered at the serenity with which women
endure the unendurable.

At the hospital he followed her in. The Davril family, she told him, had
insisted that they had no claim on his picture, and that it must be
returned to him. Mrs. Talkett went up to fetch it; and Campton waited in
one of the drawing-rooms. A step sounded behind him, and another nurse
came in?but was it a nurse, or some haloed nun from a Umbrian triptych,
her pure oval framed in white, her long fingers clasping a book and
lily?

“Mme. de Dolmetsch!” he cried; and thought: “A new face again?what an
artist!”

She seized his hands.

“I heard from dear Madge Talkett that you were here, and I’ve asked her
to leave us together.” She looked at him with ravaged eyes, as if just
risen from a penitential vigil.

“Come, please, into my little office: you didn’t know that I was the
_Infirmiere-Major_? My dear friend, what upheavals, what cataclysms! I
see no one now: all my days and nights are given to my soldiers.”

She glided ahead on noiseless sandals to a little room where a bowl of
jade filled with gardenias, and a tortoise-shell box of gold-tipped
cigarettes, stood on a desk among torn and discoloured _livrets
militaires_. The room was empty, and Mme. de Dolmetsch, closing the
door, drew Campton to a seat at her side. So close to her, he saw that
the perfect lines of her face were flawed by marks of suffering. “The
woman really has a heart,” he thought, “or the war couldn’t have made
her so much handsomer.”

Mme. de Dolmetsch leaned closer: a breath of incense floated from her
conventual draperies.

“I know why you came,” she continued; “you were good to that poor little
Davril.” She clutched Campton suddenly with a blue-veined hand. “My dear
friend, can anything justify such horrors? Isn’t it abominable that boys
like that should be murdered? That some senile old beast of a
diplomatist should decree, after a good dinner, that all we love best
must be offered up?” She caught his hands again, her liturgical scent
enveloping him. “Campton, I know you feel as I do.” She paused, pressing
his fingers hard, her beautiful mouth trembling. “For God’s sake tell
me,” she implored, “how you’ve managed to keep your son from the front!”

Campton drew away, red and inarticulate. “I?my son? Those things depend
on the authorities. My boy’s health....” he stammered.

“Yes, yes; I know. Your George is delicate. But so is my
Ladislas?dreadfully. The lungs too. I’ve trembled for him for so long;
and now, at any moment....” Two tears gathered on her long lashes and
rolled down ... “at any moment he may be taken from the War Office,
where he’s doing invaluable work, and forced into all that blood and
horror; he may be brought back to me like those poor creatures upstairs,
who are hardly men any longer ... mere vivisected animals, without eyes,
without faces.” She lowered her voice and drew her lids together, so
that her very eyes seemed to be whispering. “Ladislas has enemies who
are jealous of him (I could give you their names); at this moment
someone who ought to be at the front is intriguing to turn him out and
get his place. Oh, Campton, you’ve known this terror?you know what one’s
nights are like! Have pity?tell me how you managed!”

He had no idea of what he answered, or how he finally got away.
Everything that was dearest to him, the thought of George, the vision of
the lad dying upstairs, was defiled by this monstrous coupling of their
names with that of the supple middle-aged adventurer safe in his
spotless uniform at the War Office. And beneath the boiling-up of
Campton’s disgust a new fear lifted its head. How did Mme. de Dolmetsch
know about George? And what did she know? Evidently there had been
foolish talk somewhere. Perhaps it was Mrs. Brant?or perhaps Fortin
himself. All these great doctors forgot the professional secret with
some one woman, if not with many. Had not Fortin revealed to his own
wife the reason of Campton’s precipitate visit? The painter escaped from
Mme. de Dolmetsch’s scented lair, and from the sights and sounds of the
hospital, in a state of such perturbation that for a while he stood in
the street wondering where he had meant to go next.

He had his own reasons for agreeing to the Davrils’ suggestion that the
picture should be returned to him; and presently these reasons came
back. “They’d never dare to sell it themselves; but why shouldn’t I sell
it for them?” he had thought, remembering their denuded rooms, and the
rusty smell of the women’s mourning. It cost him a pang to part with a
study of his boy; but he was in a superstitious and expiatory mood, and
eager to act on it.

He remembered having been told by Boylston that “The Friends of French
Art” had their office in the Palais Royal, and he made his way through
the deserted arcades to the door of a once-famous restaurant.

Behind the plate-glass windows young women with rolled-up sleeves and
straw in their hair were delving in packing-cases, while, divided from
them by an improvised partition, another group were busy piling on the
cloak-room shelves garments such as had never before dishonoured them.

Campton stood fascinated by the sight of the things these young women
were sorting: pink silk combinations, sporting ulsters in glaring black
and white checks, straw hats wreathed with last summer’s sunburnt
flowers, high-heeled satin shoes split on the instep, and fringed and
bugled garments that suggested obsolete names like “dolman” and
“mantle,” and looked like the costumes dug out of a country-house attic
by amateurs preparing to play “Caste.” Was it possible that “The Friends
of French Art” proposed to clothe the families of fallen artists in
these prehistoric properties?

Boylston appeared, flushed and delighted (and with straw in his hair
also), and led his visitor up a corkscrew stair. They passed a room
where a row of people in shabby mourning like that of the Davril family
sat on restaurant chairs before a _caissiere’s_ desk; and at the desk
Campton saw Miss Anthony, her veil pushed back and a card-catalogue at
her elbow, listening to a young woman who was dramatically stating her
case.

Boylston saw Campton’s surprise, and said: “Yes, we’re desperately
short-handed, and Miss Anthony has deserted her refugees for a day or
two to help me to straighten things out.”

His own office was in a faded _cabinet particulier_ where the
dinner-table had been turned into a desk, and the weak-springed divan
was weighed down under suits of ready-made clothes bearing the label of
a wholesale clothier.

“These are the things we really give them; but they cost a lot of money
to buy,” Boylston explained. On the divan sat a handsomely dressed
elderly lady with a long emaciated face and red eyes, who rose as they
entered. Boylston spoke to her in an undertone and led her into another
_cabinet_, where Campton saw her tragic figure sink down on the sofa,
under a glass scrawled with amorous couplets.

“That was Mme. Beausite.... You didn’t recognize her? Poor thing! Her
youngest boy is blind: his eyes were put out by a shell. She is very
unhappy, and she comes here and helps now and then. Beausite? Oh no, we
never see _him_. He’s only our Honorary President.”

Boylston obviously spoke without afterthought; but Campton felt the
sting. He too was on the honorary committee.

“Poor woman! What? The young fellow who did Cubist things? I hadn’t
heard....” He remembered the cruel rumour that Beausite, when his glory
began to wane, had encouraged his three sons in three different lines of
art, so that there might always be a Beausite in the fashion.... “You
must have to listen to pretty ghastly stories here,” he said.

The young man nodded, and Campton, with less embarrassment than he had
expected, set forth his errand. In that atmosphere it seemed natural to
be planning ways of relieving misery, and Boylston at once put him at
his ease by looking pleased but not surprised.

“You mean to sell the sketch, sir? That will put the Davrils out of
anxiety for a long time; and they’re in a bad way, as you saw.” Boylston
undid the parcel, with a respectful: “May I?” and put the canvas on a
chair. He gazed at it for a few moments, the blood rising sensitively
over his face till it reached his tight ridge of hair. Campton
remembered what George had said of his friend’s silent admirations; he
was glad the young man did not speak.

When he did, it was to say with a businesslike accent: “We’re trying to
get up an auction of pictures and sketches?and if we could lead off with
this....”

It was Campton’s turn to redden. The possibility was one he had not
thought of. If the picture were sold at auction, Anderson Brant would be
sure to buy it! But he could not say this to Boylston. He hesitated, and
the other, who seemed quick at feeling his way, added at once: “But
perhaps you’d rather sell it privately? In that case we should get the
money sooner.”

It was just the right thing to say: and Campton thanked him and picked
up his sketch. At the door he hesitated, feeling that it became a member
of the honorary committee to add something more.

“How are you getting on? Getting all the help you need?”

Boylston smiled. “We need such a lot. People have been very generous:
we’ve had several big sums. But look at those ridiculous clothes
downstairs?we get boxes and boxes of such rubbish! And there are so many
applicants, and such hard cases. Take those poor Davrils, for instance.
The lame Davril girl has a talent for music: plays the violin. Well,
what good does it do her now? The artists are having an awful time. If
this war goes on much longer, it won’t be only at the front that they’ll
die.”

“Ah??” said Campton. “Well, I’ll take this to a dealer??”

On the way down he turned in to greet Miss Anthony. She looked up in
surprise, her tired face haloed in tumbling hairpins; but she was too
busy to do more than nod across the group about her desk.

At his offer to take her home she shook her head. “I’m here till after
seven. Mr. Boylston and I are nearly snowed under. We’ve got to go down
presently and help unpack; and after that I’m due at my refugee canteen
at the Nord. It’s my night shift.”

Campton, on the way back to Montmartre, fell to wondering if such
excesses of altruism were necessary, or a mere vain overflow of energy.
He was terrified by his first close glimpse of the ravages of war, and
the efforts of the little band struggling to heal them seemed pitifully
ineffectual. No doubt they did good here and there, made a few lives
less intolerable; but how the insatiable monster must laugh at them as
he spread his red havoc wider!

On reaching home, Campton forgot everything at sight of a letter from
George. He had not had one for two weeks, and this interruption, just as
the military mails were growing more regular, had made him anxious. But
it was the usual letter: brief, cheerful, inexpressive. Apparently there
was no change in George’s situation, nor any wish on his part that there
should be. He grumbled humorously at the dulness of his work and the
monotony of life in a war-zone town; and wondered whether, if this sort
of thing went on, there might not soon be some talk of leave. And just
at the end of his affectionate and unsatisfactory two pages, Campton lit
on a name that roused him.

“I saw a fellow who’d seen Benny Upsher yesterday on his way to the
English front. The young lunatic looked very fit. You know he
volunteered in the English army when he found he couldn’t get into the
French. He’s likely to get all the fighting he wants.” It was a relief
to know that someone had seen Benny Upsher lately. The letter was but
four days old, and he was then on his way to the front. Probably he was
not yet in the fighting he wanted, and one could, without remorse, call
up an unmutilated face and clear blue eyes.

Campton, re-reading the postscript, was struck by a small thing. George
had originally written: “I saw Benny Upsher yesterday,” and had then
altered the phrase to: “I saw a fellow who’d seen Benny Upsher.” There
was nothing out of the way in that: it simply showed that he had written
in haste and revised the sentence. But he added: “The young lunatic
looked very fit.” Well: that too was natural. It was “the fellow” who
reported Benny as looking fit; the phrase was rather elliptic, but
Campton could hardly have said why it gave him the impression that it
was George himself who had seen Upsher. The idea was manifestly absurd,
since there was the length of the front between George’s staff-town and
the fiery pit yawning for his cousin. Campton laid aside the letter with
the distinct wish that his son had not called Benny Upsher a young
lunatic.




                                  XIV


When Campton took his sketch of George to Leonce Black, the dealer who
specialized in “Camptons,” he was surprised at the magnitude of the sum
which the great picture-broker, lounging in a glossy War Office uniform
among his Gauguins and Vuillards, immediately offered.

Leonce Black noted his surprise and smiled. “You think there’s nothing
doing nowadays? Don’t you believe it, Mr. Campton. Now that the big men
have stopped painting, the collectors are all the keener to snap up
what’s left in their portfolios.” He placed the cheque in Campton’s
hand, and drew back to study the effect of the sketch, which he had
slipped into a frame against a velvet curtain. “Ah??” he said, as if he
were tasting an old wine.

As Campton turned to go the dealer’s enthusiasm bubbled over. “Haven’t
you got anything more? Remember me if you have.”

“I don’t sell my sketches,” said Campton. “This was exceptional?for a
charity....”

“I know, I know. Well, you’re likely to have a good many more calls of
the same sort before we get this war over,” the dealer remarked
philosophically. “Anyhow, remember I can place anything you’ll give me.
When people want a Campton it’s to me they come. I’ve got standing
orders from two clients ... both given before the war, and both good
to-day.”

Campton paused in the doorway, seized by his old fear of the painting’s
passing into Anderson Brant’s possession.

“Look here: where is this one going?”

The dealer cocked his handsome grey head and glanced archly through
plump eyelids. “Violation of professional secrecy? Well.... Well ...
under constraint I’ll confess it’s to a young lady: great admirer,
artist herself. Had her order by cable from New York a year ago. Been on
the lookout ever since.”

“Oh, all right,” Campton answered, repocketing the money.

He set out at once for “The Friends of French Art,” and Leonce Black,
bound for the Ministry of War, walked by his side, regaling him
alternately with the gossip of the Ministry and with racy anecdotes of
the dealers’ world. In M. Black’s opinion the war was an inexcusable
blunder, since Germany was getting to be the best market for the kind of
freak painters out of whom the dealers who “know how to make a man
‘foam’” can make a big turn over. “I don’t know what on earth will
become of all those poor devils now: Paris cared for them only because
she knew Germany would give any money for their things. Personally, as
you know, I’ve always preferred sounder goods: I’m a classic, my dear
Campton, and I can feel only classic art,” said the dealer, swelling out
his uniformed breast and stroking his Assyrian nose as though its
handsome curve followed the pure Delphic line. “But, as long as things
go on as they are at present in _my_ department of the administration,
the war’s not going to end in a hurry,” he continued. “And now we’re in
for it, we’ve got to see the thing through.”

Campton found Boylston, as usual, in his melancholy _cabinet
particulier_. He was listening to the tale of a young woman with
streaming eyes and an extravagant hat. She was so absorbed in her
trouble that she did not notice Campton’s entrance, and behind her back
the painter made a sign to say that she was not to be interrupted.

He was as much interested in the suppliant’s tale as in watching
Boylston’s way of listening. That modest and commonplace-looking young
man was beginning to excite a lively curiosity in Campton. It was not
only that he remembered George’s commendation, for he knew that the
generous enthusiasms of youth may be inspired by trifles imperceptible
to the older. It was Boylston himself who interested the painter. He
knew no more of the young man than the scant details Miss Anthony could
give. Boylston, it appeared, was the oldest hope of a well-to-do
Connecticut family. On his leaving college a place had been reserved for
him in the paternal business; but he had announced good-humouredly that
he did not mean to spend his life in an office, and one day, after a ten
minutes’ conversation with his father, as to which details were lacking,
he had packed a suitcase and sailed for France. There he had lived ever
since, in shabby rooms in the rue de Verneuil, on the scant allowance
remitted by an irate parent: apparently never running into debt, yet
always ready to help a friend.

All the American art-students in Paris knew Boylston; and though he was
still in the early thirties, they all looked up to him. For Boylston had
one quality which always impresses youth: Boylston knew everybody.
Whether you went with him to a smart restaurant in the rue Royale, or to
a wine-shop of the Left Bank, the _patron_ welcomed him with the same
cordiality, and sent the same emphatic instructions to the cook. The
first fresh peas and the tenderest spring chicken were always for this
quiet youth, who, when he was alone, dined cheerfully on veal and _vin
ordinaire_. If you wanted to know where to get the best Burgundy,
Boylston could tell you; he could also tell you where to buy an
engagement ring for your girl, a Ford runabout going at half-price, or
the _papier timbre_ on which to address a summons to a recalcitrant
laundress.

If you got into a row with your landlady you found that Boylston knew
her, and that at sight of him she melted and withdrew her claim; or,
failing this, he knew the solicitor in whose office her son was a clerk,
or had other means of reducing her to reason. Boylston also knew a man
who could make old clocks go, another who could clean flannels without
their shrinking, and a third who could get you old picture-frames for a
song; and, best of all, when any inexperienced American youth was caught
in the dark Parisian cobweb (and the people at home were on no account
to hear about it) Boylston was found to be the friend and familiar of
certain occult authorities who, with a smile and a word of warning,
could break the mesh and free the victim.

The mystery was, how and why all these people did what Boylston wanted;
but the reason began to dawn on Campton as he watched the young woman in
the foolish hat deliver herself of her grievance. Boylston was simply a
perfect listener?and most of his life was spent in listening. Everything
about him listened: his round forehead and peering screwed-up eyes, his
lips twitching responsively under the close-clipped moustache, and every
crease and dimple of his sagacious and humorous young countenance; even
the attitude of his short fat body, with elbows comfortably bedded in
heaped up papers, and fingers plunged into his crinkled hair. There was
never a hint of hurry or impatience about him: having once asserted his
right to do what he liked with his life, he was apparently content to
let all his friends prey on it. You never caught his eye on the clock,
or his lips shaping an answer before you had turned the last corner of
your story. Yet when the story was told, and he had surveyed it in all
its bearings, you could be sure he would do what he could for you, and
do it before the day was over.

“Very well, Mademoiselle,” he said, when the young woman had finished.
“I promise you I’ll see Mme. Beausite, and try to get her to recognize
your claim.”

“Mind you, I don’t ask charity?I won’t _take_ charity from your
committee!” the young lady hissed, gathering up a tawdry hand-bag.

“Oh, we’re not forcing it on any one,” smiled Boylston, opening the door
for her.

When he turned back to Campton his face was flushed and frowning. “Poor
thing! She’s a nuisance, but I’ll fight to the last ditch for her. The
chap she lives with was Beausite’s secretary and understudy, and
devilled for him before the war. The poor fellow has come back from the
front a complete wreck, and can’t even collect the salary Beausite owes
him for the last three months before the war. Beausite’s plea is that
he’s too poor, and that the war lets him out of paying. Of course he
counts on our doing it for him.”

“And you’re not going to?”

“Well,” said Boylston humorously, “I shouldn’t wonder if he beat us in
the long run. But I’ll have a try first; and anyhow the poor girl
needn’t know. She used to earn a little money doing fashion-articles,
but of course there’s no market for that now, and I don’t see how the
pair can live. They have a little boy, and there’s an infirm mother, and
they’re waiting to get married till the girl can find a job.”

“Good Lord!” Campton groaned, with a sudden vision of the countless
little trades and traffics arrested by the war, and all the industrious
thousands reduced to querulous pauperism or slow death.

“How _do_ they live?all these people?”

“They don’t?always. I could tell you??”

“Don’t, for God’s sake; I can’t stand it.” Campton drew out the cheque.
“Here: this is what I’ve got for the Davrils.”

“Good Lord!” said Boylston, staring with round eyes.

“It will pull them through, anyhow, won’t it?” Campton triumphed.

“Well??” said Boylston. “It will if you’ll endorse it,” he added,
smiling. Campton laughed and took up a pen.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A day or two later Campton, returning home one afternoon, overtook a
small black-veiled figure with a limp like his own. He guessed at once
that it was the lame Davril girl, come to thank him; and his dislike of
such ceremonies caused him to glance about for a way of escape. But as
he did so the girl turned with a smile that put him to shame. He
remembered Adele Anthony’s saying, one day when he had found her in her
refugee office patiently undergoing a like ordeal: “We’ve no right to
refuse the only coin they can repay us in.”

The Davril girl was a plain likeness of her brother, with the same
hungry flame in her eyes. She wore the nondescript black that Campton
had remarked at the funeral; and knowing the importance which the French
attach to every detail of conventional mourning, he wondered that mother
and daughter had not laid out part of his gift in crape. But doubtless
the equally strong instinct of thrift had caused Mme. Davril to put away
the whole sum.

Mlle. Davril greeted Campton pleasantly, and assured him that she had
not found the long way from Villejuif to Montmartre too difficult.

“I would have gone to you,” the painter protested; but she answered that
she wanted to see with her own eyes where her brother’s friend lived.

In the studio she looked about her with a quick searching glance, said
“Oh, a piano??” as if the fact were connected with the object of her
errand?and then, settling herself in an armchair, unclasped her shabby
hand-bag.

“Monsieur, there has been a misunderstanding; this money is not ours.”
She laid Campton’s cheque on the table.

A flush of annoyance rose to the painter’s face. What on earth had
Boylston let him in for? If the Davrils were as proud as all that it was
not worth while to have sold a sketch it had cost him such a pang to
part with. He felt the exasperation of the would be philanthropist when
he first discovers that nothing complicates life as much as doing good.

“But, Mademoiselle??”

“This money is not ours. If Rene had lived he would never have sold your
picture; and we would starve rather than betray his trust.”

When stout ladies in velvet declare that they would starve rather than
sacrifice this or that principle, the statement has only the cold beauty
of rhetoric; but on the drawn lips of a thinly-clad young woman
evidently acquainted with the process, it becomes a fiery reality.

“Starve?nonsense! My dear young lady, you betray him when you talk like
that,” said Campton, moved.

She shook her head. “It depends, Monsieur, which things matter most to
one. We shall never?my mother and I?do anything that Rene would not have
done. The picture was not ours: we brought it back to you??”

“But if the picture’s not yours it’s mine,” Campton interrupted; “and
I’d a right to sell it, and a right to do what I choose with the money.”

His visitor smiled. “That’s what we feel; it was what I was coming to.”
And clasping her threadbare glove-tips about the arms of the chair Mlle.
Davril set forth with extreme precision the object of her visit.

It was to propose that Campton should hand over the cheque to “The
Friends of French Art,” devoting one-third to the aid of the families of
combatant painters, the rest to young musicians and authors. “It doesn’t
seem right that only the painters’ families should benefit by what your
committee are doing. And Rene would have thought so too. He knew so many
young men of letters and journalists who, before the war, just managed
to keep their families alive; and in my profession I could tell you of
poor music-teachers and accompanists whose work stopped the day war
broke out, and who have been living ever since on the crusts their
luckier comrades could spare them. Rene would have let us accept from
you help that was shared with others: he would have been so glad, often,
of a few francs to relieve the misery we see about us. And this great
sum might be the beginning of a co-operative work for artists ruined by
the war.”

She went on to explain that in the families of almost all the young
artists at the front there was at least one member at home who practised
one of the arts, or who was capable of doing some kind of useful work.
The value of Campton’s gift, Mlle. Davril argued, would be tripled if it
were so employed as to give the artists and their families occupation:
producing at least the illusion that those who could were earning their
living, or helping their less fortunate comrades. “It’s not only a
question of saving their dignity: I don’t believe much in that. You have
dignity or you haven’t?and if you have, it doesn’t need any saving,”
this clear-toned young woman remarked. “The real question, for all of us
artists, is that of keeping our hands in, and our interest in our work
alive; sometimes, too, of giving a new talent its first chance. At any
rate, it would mean work and not stagnation; which is all that most
charity produces.”

She developed her plan: for the musicians, concerts in private houses
(hence her glance at the piano); for the painters, small exhibitions in
the rooms of the committee, where their pictures would be sold with the
deduction of a percentage, to be returned to the general fund; and for
the writers?well, their lot was perhaps the hardest to deal with; but an
employment agency might be opened, where those who chose could put their
names down and take such work as was offered. Above all, Mlle. Davril
again insisted, the fund created by Campton’s gift was to be spent only
in giving employment, not for mere relief.

Campton listened with growing attention. Nothing hitherto had been less
in the line of his interests than the large schemes of general
amelioration which were coming to be classed under the transatlantic
term of “Social Welfare.” If questioned on the subject a few months
earlier he would probably have concealed his fundamental indifference
under the profession of an extreme individualism, and the assertion of
every man’s right to suffer and starve in his own way. Even since Rene
Davril’s death had brought home to him the boundless havoc of the war,
he had felt no more than the impulse to ease his own pain by putting his
hand in his pocket when a particular case was too poignant to be
ignored.

Yet here were people who had already offered their dearest to France,
and were now pleading to be allowed to give all the rest; and who had
had the courage and wisdom to think out in advance the form in which
their gift would do most good. Campton had the awe of the unpractical
man for anyone who knows how to apply his ideas. He felt that there was
no use in disputing Mlle. Davril’s plan: he must either agree to it or
repocket his cheque.

“I’ll do as you want, of course; but I’m not much good about details.
Hadn’t you better consult some one else?” he suggested.

Oh, that was already done: she had outlined her project to Miss Anthony
and Mr. Boylston, who approved. All she wanted was Campton’s consent;
and this he gave the more cordially when he learned that, for the
present at least, nothing more was expected of him. First steps in
beneficence, he felt, were unspeakably terrifying; yet he was already
aware that, resist as he might, he would never be able to keep his
footing on the brink of that abyss.

Into it, as the days went by, his gaze was oftener and oftener plunged.
He had begun to feel that pity was his only remaining link with his
kind, the one barrier between himself and the dreadful solitude which
awaited him when he returned to his studio. What would there have been
to think of there, alone among his unfinished pictures and his broken
memories, if not the wants and woes of people more bereft than himself?
His own future was not a thing to dwell on. George was safe: but what
George and he were likely to make of each other after the ordeal was
over was a question he preferred to put aside. He was more and more
taking George and his safety for granted, as a solid standing-ground
from which to reach out a hand to the thousands struggling in the
depths. As long as the world’s fate was in the balance it was every
man’s duty to throw into that balance his last ounce of brain and
muscle. Campton wondered how he had ever thought that an accident of
birth, a remoteness merely geographical, could justify, or even make
possible, an attitude of moral aloofness. Harvey Mayhew’s reasons for
wishing to annihilate Germany began to seem less grotesque than his own
for standing aside.

In the heat of his conversion he no longer grudged the hours given to
Mr. Mayhew. He patiently led his truculent relative from one government
office to another, everywhere laying stress on Mr. Mayhew’s sympathy
with France and his desire to advocate her cause in the United States,
and trying to curtail his enumeration of his grievances by a glance at
the clock, and the reminder that they had another Minister to see. Mr.
Mayhew was not very manageable. His adventure had grown with repetition,
and he was increasingly disposed to feel that the retaliation he called
down on Germany could best be justified by telling every one what he had
suffered from her. Intensely aware of the value of time in Utica, he was
less sensible of it in Paris, and seemed to think that, since he had
left a flourishing business to preach the Holy War, other people ought
to leave their affairs to give him a hearing. But his zeal and
persistence were irresistible, and doors which Campton had seen barred
against the most reasonable appeals flew open at the sound of Mr.
Mayhew’s trumpet. His pink face and silvery hair gave him an apostolic
air, and circles to which America had hitherto been a mere speck in
space suddenly discovered that he represented that legendary character,
the Typical American.

The keen Boylston, prompt to note and utilize the fact, urged Campton to
interest Mr. Mayhew in “The Friends of French Art,” and with
considerable flourish the former Peace Delegate was produced at a
committee meeting and given his head. But his interest flagged when he
found that the “Friends” concerned themselves with Atrocities only in so
far as any act of war is one, and that their immediate task was the
humdrum one of feeding and clothing the families of the combatants and
sending “comforts” to the trenches. He served up, with a somewhat
dog-eared eloquence, the usual account of his own experiences, and
pressed a modest gift upon the treasurer; but when he departed, after
wringing everybody’s hands, and leaving the French members bedewed with
emotion, Campton had the conviction that their quiet weekly meetings
would not often be fluttered by his presence.

Campton was spending an increasing amount of time in the Palais Royal
restaurant, where he performed any drudgery for which no initiative was
required. Once or twice, when Miss Anthony was submerged by a fresh
influx of refugees, he lent her a hand too; and on most days he dropped
in late at her office, waited for her to sift and dismiss the last
applicants, and saw her home through the incessant rain. It interested
him to note that the altruism she had so long wasted on pampered friends
was developing into a wise and orderly beneficence. He had always
thought of her as an eternal schoolgirl; now she had grown into a woman.
Sometimes he fancied the change dated from the moment when their eyes
had met across the station, the day they had seen George off. He
wondered whether it might not be interesting to paint her new face, if
ever painting became again thinkable.

“Passion?I suppose the great thing is a capacity for passion,” he mused.

In himself he imagined the capacity to be quite dead. He loved his son:
yes?but he was beginning to see that he loved him for certain qualities
he had read into him, and that perhaps after all??. Well, perhaps after
all the sin for which he was now atoning in loneliness was that of
having been too exclusively an artist, of having cherished George too
egotistically and self-indulgently, too much as his own most beautiful
creation. If he had loved him more humanly, more tenderly and
recklessly, might he have not put into his son the tenderness and
recklessness which were beginning to seem to him the qualities most
supremely human?




                                   XV


A week or two later, coming home late from a long day’s work at the
office, Campton saw Mme. Lebel awaiting him.

He always stopped for a word now; fearing each time that there was bad
news of Jules Lebel, but not wishing to seem to avoid her.

To-day, however, Mme. Lebel, though mysterious, was not anxious.

“Monsieur will find the studio open. There’s a lady: she insisted on
going up.”

“A lady? Why did you let her in? What kind of a lady?”

“A lady?well, a lady with such magnificent furs that one couldn’t keep
her out in the cold,” Mme. Lebel answered with simplicity.

Campton went up apprehensively. The idea of unknown persons in
possession of his studio always made him nervous. Whoever they were,
whatever errands they came on, they always?especially women?disturbed
the tranquil course of things, faced him with unexpected problems,
unsettled him in one way or another. Bouncing in on people suddenly was
like dynamiting fish: it left him with his mind full of fragments of
dismembered thoughts.

As he entered he perceived from the temperate atmosphere that Mme. Lebel
had not only opened the studio but made up the fire. The lady’s furs
must indeed be magnificent.

She sat at the farther end of the room, in a high-backed chair near the
stove, and when she rose he recognized his former wife. The long sable
cloak, which had slipped back over the chair, justified Mme. Lebel’s
description, but the dress beneath it appeared to Campton simpler than
Mrs. Brant’s habitual raiment. The lamplight, striking up into her
powdered face, puffed out her under-lids and made harsh hollows in her
cheeks. She looked frightened, ill and yet determined.

“John??” she began, laying her hand on his sleeve.

It was the first time she had ever set foot in his shabby quarters, and
in his astonishment he could only stammer out: “Julia??”

But as he looked at her he saw that her face was wet with tears.
“Not?bad news?” he broke out.

She shook her head and, drawing a handkerchief from a
diamond-monogrammed bag, wiped away the tears and the powder. Then she
pressed the handkerchief to her lips, gazing at him with eyes as
helpless as a child’s.

“Sit down,” said Campton.

As they faced each other across the long table, with papers and
paint-rags and writing materials pushed aside to make room for the
threadbare napkin on which his plate and glass, and bottle of _vin
ordinaire_, were set out, he wondered if the scene woke in her any
memory of their first days of gaiety and poverty, or if she merely
pitied him for still living in such squalor. And suddenly it occurred to
him that when the war was over, and George came back, it would be
pleasant to hunt out a little apartment in an old house in the Faubourg
St. Germain, put some good furniture in it, and oppose the discreeter
charm of such an interior to the heavy splendours of the Avenue Marigny.
How could he expect to hold a luxury-loving youth if he had only this
dingy studio to receive him in?

Mrs. Brant began to speak.

“I came here to see you because I didn’t wish any one to know; not
Adele, nor even Anderson.” Leaning toward him she went on in short
breathless sentences: “I’ve just left Madge Talkett: you know her, I
think? She’s at Mme. de Dolmetsch’s hospital. Something dreadful has
happened ... too dreadful. It seems that Mme. de Dolmetsch was very much
in love with Ladislas Isador; a writer, wasn’t he? I don’t know his
books, but Madge tells me they’re wonderful ... and of course men like
that ought not to be sent to the front....”

“Men like what?”

“Geniuses,” said Mrs. Brant. “He was dreadfully delicate besides, and
was doing admirable work on some military commission in Paris; I believe
he knew any number of languages. And poor Mme. de Dolmetsch?you know
I’ve never approved of her; but things are so changed nowadays, and at
any rate she was madly attached to him, and had done everything to keep
him in Paris: medical certificates, people at Headquarters working for
her, and all the rest. But it seems there are no end of officers always
intriguing to get staff-jobs: strong able-bodied young men who ought to
be in the trenches, and are fit for nothing else, but who are jealous of
the others. And last week, in spite of all she could do, poor Isador was
ordered to the front.”

Campton made an impatient movement. It was even more distasteful to him
to be appealed to by Mrs. Brant in Isador’s name than by Mme. de
Dolmetsch in George’s. His gorge rose at the thought that people should
associate in their minds cases as different as those of his son and Mme.
de Dolmetsch’s lover.

“I’m sorry,” he said. “But if you’ve come to ask me to do something more
about George?take any new steps?it’s no use. I can’t do the sort of
thing to keep my son safe that Mme. de Dolmetsch would do for her
lover.”

Mrs. Brant stared. “Safe? He was killed the day after he got to the
front.”

“Good Lord?Isador?”

Ladislas Isador killed at the front! The words remained unmeaning; by no
effort could Campton relate them to the fat middle-aged philanderer with
his Jewish eyes, his Slav eloquence, his Levantine gift for getting on,
and for getting out from under. Campton tried to picture the clever
contriving devil drawn in his turn into that merciless red eddy, and
gulped down the Monster’s throat with the rest. What a mad world it was,
in which the same horrible and magnificent doom awaited the coward and
the hero!

“Poor Mme. de Dolmetsch!” he muttered, remembering with a sense of
remorse her desperate appeal and his curt rebuff. Once again the poor
creature’s love had enlightened her, and she had foreseen what no one
else in the world would have believed: that her lover was to die like a
hero.

“Isador was nearly forty, and had a weak heart; and she’d left nothing,
literally nothing, undone to save him.” Campton read in his wife’s eyes
what was coming. “It’s impossible _now_ that George should not be
taken,” Mrs. Brant went on.

The same thought had tightened Campton’s own heart-strings; but he had
hoped she would not say it.

“It may be George’s turn any day,” she insisted.

They sat and looked at each other without speaking; then she began again
imploringly: “I tell you there’s not a moment to be lost!”

Campton picked up a palette-knife and began absently to rub it with an
oily rag. Mrs. Brant’s anguished voice still sounded on. “Unless
something is done immediately.... It appears there’s a regular hunt for
_embusques_, as they’re called. As if it was everybody’s business to be
killed! How’s the staff-work to be carried on if they’re all taken? But
it’s certain that if we don’t act at once ... act energetically....”

He fixed his eyes on hers. “Why do you come to _me_?” he asked.

Her lids opened wide. “But he’s our child.”

“Your husband knows more people?he has ways, you’ve often told me??”

She reddened faintly and seemed about to speak; but the reply died on
her lips.

“Why did you say,” Campton pursued, “that you had come here because you
wanted to see me without Brant’s knowing it?”

She lowered her eyes and fixed them on the knife he was still
automatically rubbing.

“Because Anderson thinks.... Anderson won’t.... He says he’s done all he
can.”

“Ah??” cried Campton, drawing a deep breath. He threw back his
shoulders, as if to shake off a weight. “I?feel exactly as Brant does,”
he declared.

“You?you feel as he does? You, George’s father? But a father has never
done all he can for his son! There’s always something more that he can
do!”

The words, breaking from her in a cry, seemed suddenly to change her
from an ageing doll into a living and agonized woman. Campton had never
before felt as near to her, as moved to the depths by her. For the
length of a heart-beat he saw her again with a red-haired baby in her
arms, the light of morning on her face.

“My dear?I’m sorry.” He laid his hand on hers.

“Sorry?sorry? I don’t want you to be sorry. I want you to do something?I
want you to save him!”

He faced her with bent head, gazing absently at their interwoven
fingers: each hand had forgotten to release the other.

“I can’t do anything more,” he repeated.

She started up with a despairing exclamation. “What’s happened to you?
Who has influenced you? What has changed you?”

How could he answer her? He hardly knew himself: had hardly been
conscious of the change till she suddenly flung it in his face. If blind
animal passion be the profoundest as well as the fiercest form of
attachment, his love for his boy was at that moment as nothing to hers.
Yet his feeling for George, in spite of all the phrases he dressed it
in, had formerly in its essence been no other. That his boy should
survive?survive at any price?that had been all he cared for or sought to
achieve. It had been convenient to justify himself by arguing that
George was not bound to fight for France; but Campton now knew that he
would have made the same effort to protect his son if the country
engaged had been his own.

In the careless pre-war world, as George himself had once said, it had
seemed unbelievable that people should ever again go off and die in a
ditch to oblige anybody. Even now, the automatic obedience of the
millions of the untaught and the unthinking, though it had its deep
pathetic significance, did not move Campton like the clear-eyed
sacrifice of the few who knew why they were dying. Jean Fortin, Rene
Davril, and such lads as young Louis Dastrey, with his reasoned horror
of butchery and waste in general, and his instant grasp of the necessity
of this particular sacrifice: it was they who had first shed light on
the dark problem.

Campton had never before, at least consciously, thought of himself and
the few beings he cared for as part of a greater whole, component
elements of the immense amazing spectacle. But the last four months had
shown him man as a defenceless animal suddenly torn from his shell,
stripped of all the interwoven tendrils of association, habit,
background, daily ways and words, daily sights and sounds, and flung out
of the human habitable world into naked ether, where nothing breathes or
lives. That was what war did; that was why those who best understood it
in all its farthest-reaching abomination willingly gave their lives to
put an end to it.

He heard Mrs. Brant crying.

“Julia,” he said, “Julia, I wish you’d try to see....”

She dashed away her tears. “See what? All I see is _you_, sitting here
safe and saying you can do nothing to save him! But to have the right to
say that you ought to be in the trenches yourself! What do you suppose
those young men out there think of their fathers, safe at home, who are
too high-minded and conscientious to protect them?”

He looked at her compassionately. “Yes,” he said, “that’s the bitterest
part of it. But for that, there would hardly be anything in the worst
war for us old people to lie awake about.”

Mrs. Brant had stood up and was feverishly pulling on her gloves: he saw
that she no longer heard him. He helped her to draw her furs about her,
and stood waiting while she straightened her veil and tapped the waves
of hair into place, her eyes blindly seeking for a mirror. There was
nothing more that either could say.

He lifted the lamp, and went out of the door ahead of her.

“You needn’t come down,” she said in a sob; but leaning over the rail
into the darkness he answered: “I’ll give you a light: the concierge has
forgotten the lamp on the stairs.”

He went ahead of her down the long greasy flights, and as they reached
the ground floor he heard a noise of feet coming and going, and
frightened voices exclaiming. In the doorway of the porter’s lodge Mrs.
Brant’s splendid chauffeur stood looking on compassionately at a group
of women gathered about Mme. Lebel.

The old woman sat in her den, her arms stretched across the table, her
sewing fallen at her feet. On the table lay an open letter. The grocer’s
wife from the corner stood by, sobbing.

Mrs. Brant stopped, and Campton, sure now of what was coming, pushed his
way through the neighbours about the door. Mme. Lebel’s eyes met his
with the mute reproach of a tortured animal. “Jules,” she said, “last
Wednesday ... through the heart.”

Campton took her old withered hand. The women ceased sobbing and a hush
fell upon the stifling little room. When Campton looked up again he saw
Julia Brant, pale and bewildered, hurrying toward her motor, and the
vault of the porte-cochere sent back the chauffeur’s answer to her
startled question: “Poor old lady?yes, her only son’s been killed at the
front.”




                                  XVI


Campton sat with his friend Dastrey in the latter’s pleasant little
_entresol_ full of Chinese lacquer and Venetian furniture.

Dastrey, in the last days of January, had been sent home from his
ambulance with an attack of rheumatism; and when it became clear that he
could no longer be of use in the mud and cold of the army zone he had
reluctantly taken his place behind a desk at the Ministry of War. The
friends had dined early, so that he might get back to his night shift;
and they sat over coffee and liqueurs, the mist of their cigars floating
across lustrous cabinet-fronts and the worn gilding of slender consoles.

On the other side of the hearth young Boylston, sunk in an armchair,
smoked and listened.

“It always comes back to the same thing,” Campton was saying nervously.
“What right have useless old men like me, sitting here with my cigar by
this good fire, to preach blood and butchery to boys like George and
your nephew?”

Again and again, during the days since Mrs. Brant’s visit, he had turned
over in his mind the same torturing question. How was he to answer that
last taunt of hers?

Not long ago, Paul Dastrey would have seemed the last person to whom he
could have submitted such a problem. Dastrey, in the black August days,
starting for the front in such a frenzy of baffled blood-lust, had
remained for Campton the type of man with whom it was impossible to
discuss the war. But three months of hard service in _Postes de Secours_
and along the awful battle-edge had sent him home with a mind no longer
befogged by personal problems. He had done his utmost, and knew it; and
the fact gave him the professional calm which keeps surgeons and nurses
steady through all the horrors they are compelled to live among. Those
few months had matured and mellowed him more than a lifetime of Paris.

He leaned back with half-closed lids, quietly considering his friend’s
difficulty.

“I see. Your idea is that, being unable to do even the humble kind of
job that I’ve been assigned to, you’ve no right _not_ to try to keep
your boy out of it if you can?”

“Well?by any honourable means.”

Dastrey laughed faintly, and Campton reddened. “The word’s not happy, I
admit.”

“I wasn’t thinking of that: I was considering how the meaning had
evaporated out of lots of our old words, as if the general smash-up had
broken their stoppers. So many of them, you see,” said Dastrey smiling,
“we’d taken good care not to uncork for centuries. Since I’ve been on
the edge of what’s going on fifty miles from here a good many of my own
words have lost their meaning, and I’m not prepared to say where honour
lies in a case like yours.” He mused a moment, and then went on: “What
would George’s view be?”

Campton did not immediately reply. Not so many weeks ago he would have
welcomed the chance of explaining that George’s view, thank God, had
remained perfectly detached and objective, and that the cheerful
acceptance of duties forcibly imposed on him had not in the least
obscured his sense of the fundamental injustice of his being mixed up in
the thing at all.

But how could he say this now? If George’s view were still what his
father had been in the habit of saying it was, then he held that view
alone: Campton himself no longer thought that any civilized man could
afford to stand aside from such a conflict.

“As far as I know,” he said, “George hasn’t changed his mind.”

Boylston stirred in his armchair, knocked the ash from his cigar, and
looked up at the ceiling.

“Whereas _you_??” Dastrey suggested.

“Yes,” said Campton. “I feel differently. You speak of the difference of
having been in contact with what’s going on out there. But how can
anybody _not_ be in contact, who has any imagination, any sense of right
and wrong? Do these pictures and hangings ever shut it out from you?or
those books over there, when you turn to them after your day’s work?
Perhaps they do, because you’ve got a real job, a job you’ve been
ordered to do, and can’t not do. But for a useless drifting devil like
me?my God, the sights and the sounds of it are always with me!”

“There are a good many people who wouldn’t call you useless, Mr.
Campton,” said Boylston.

Campton shook his head. “I wish there were any healing in the kind of
thing I’m doing; perhaps there is to you, to whom it appears to come
naturally to love your kind.” (Boylston laughed.) “Service is of no use
without conviction: that’s one of the uncomfortable truths this stir-up
has brought to the surface. I was meant to paint pictures in a world at
peace, and I should have more respect for myself if I could go on
unconcernedly doing it, instead of pining to be in all the places where
I’m not wanted, and should be of no earthly use. That’s why??” he
paused, looked about him, and sought understanding in Dastrey’s friendly
gaze: “That’s why I respect George’s opinion, which really consists in
not having any, and simply doing without comment the work assigned to
him. The whole thing is so far beyond human measure that one’s
individual rage and revolt seem of no more use than a woman’s scream at
an accident she isn’t in.”

Even while he spoke, Campton knew he was arguing only against himself.
He did not in the least believe that any individual sentiment counted
for nothing at such a time, and Dastrey really spoke for him in
rejoining: “Every one can at least contribute an attitude: as you have,
my dear fellow. Boylston’s here to confirm it.”

Boylston grunted his assent.

“An attitude?an attitude?” Campton retorted. “The word is revolting to
me! Anything a man like me can do is too easy to be worth doing. And as
for anything one can _say_: how dare one say anything, in the face of
what is being done out there to keep this room and this fire, and this
ragged end of life, safe for such survivals as you and me?” He crossed
to the table to take another cigar. As he did so he laid an apologetic
pressure on his host’s shoulder. “Men of our age are the chorus of the
tragedy, Dastrey; we can’t help ourselves. As soon as I open my lips to
blame or praise I see myself in white petticoats, with a long beard held
on by an elastic, goading on the combatants in a cracked voice from a
safe corner of the ramparts. On the whole I’d sooner be spinning among
the women.”

“Well,” said Dastrey, getting up, “I’ve got to get back to my spinning
at the Ministry; where, by the way, there are some very pretty young
women at the distaff. It’s extraordinary how much better pretty girls
type than plain ones; I see now why they get all the jobs.”

The three went out into the winter blackness. They were used by this
time to the new Paris: to extinguished lamps, shuttered windows,
deserted streets, the almost total cessation of wheeled traffic. All
through the winter, life had seemed in suspense everywhere, as much on
the battle-front as in the rear. Day after day, week after week, of rain
and sleet and mud; day after day, week after week, of vague
non-committal news from west and east; everywhere the enemy baffled but
still menacing, everywhere death, suffering, destruction, without any
perceptible oscillation of the scales, any compensating hope of good to
come out of the long slow endless waste. The benumbed and darkened Paris
of those February days seemed the visible image of a benumbed and
darkened world.

Down the empty asphalt sheeted with rain the rare street lights
stretched interminable reflections. The three men crossed the bridge and
stood watching the rush of the Seine. Below them gloomed the vague bulk
of deserted bath-houses, unlit barges, river-steamers out of commission.
The Seine too had ceased to live: only a single orange gleam, low on the
water’s edge, undulated on the jetty waves like a streamer of seaweed.

The two Americans left Dastrey at his Ministry, and the painter strolled
on to Boylston’s lodging before descending to the underground railway.
He, whom his lameness had made so heavy and indolent, now limped about
for hours at a time over wet pavements and under streaming skies: these
midnight tramps had become a sort of expiatory need to him. “Out
there?out there, if they had these wet stones under them they’d think it
was the floor of heaven,” he used to muse, driving on obstinately
through rain and darkness.

The thought of “Out there” besieged him day and night, the phrase was
always in his ears. Wherever he went he was pursued by visions of that
land of doom: visions of fathomless mud, rat-haunted trenches, freezing
nights under the sleety sky, men dying in the barbed wire between the
lines or crawling out to save a comrade and being shattered to death on
the return. His collaboration with Boylston had brought Campton into
close contact with these things. He knew by heart the history of scores
and scores of young men of George’s age who were doggedly suffering and
dying a few hours away from the Palais Royal office where their records
were kept. Some of these histories were so heroically simple that the
sense of pain was lost in beauty, as though one were looking at
suffering transmuted into poetry. But others were abominable,
unendurable, in their long-drawn useless horror: stories of cold and
filth and hunger, of ineffectual effort, of hideous mutilation, of men
perishing of thirst in a shell-hole, and half-dismembered bodies
dragging themselves back to shelter only to die as they reached it.
Worst of all were the perpetually recurring reports of military
blunders, medical neglect, carelessness in high places: the torturing
knowledge of the lives that might have been saved if this or that
officer’s brain, this or that surgeon’s hand, had acted more promptly.
An impression of waste, confusion, ignorance, obstinacy, prejudice, and
the indifference of selfishness or of mortal fatigue, emanated from
these narratives written home from the front, or faltered out by white
lips on hospital pillows.

“The Friends of French Art,” especially since they had enlarged their
range, had to do with young men accustomed to the freest exercise of
thought and criticism. A nation in arms does not judge a war as simply
as an army of professional soldiers. All these young intelligences were
so many subtly-adjusted instruments for the testing of the machinery of
which they formed a part; and not one accepted the results passively.
Yet in one respect all were agreed: the “had to be” of the first day was
still on every lip. The German menace must be met: chance willed that
theirs should be the generation to meet it; on that point speculation
was vain and discussion useless. The question that stirred them all was
how the country they were defending was helping them to carry on the
struggle. There the evidence was cruelly clear, the comment often
scathingly explicit; and Campton, bending still lower over the abyss,
caught a shuddering glimpse of what might be?must be?if political
blunders, inertia, tolerance, perhaps even evil ambitions and
connivances, should at last outweigh the effort of the front. There was
no logical argument against such a possibility. All civilizations had
their orbit; all societies rose and fell. Some day, no doubt, by the
action of that law, everything that made the world livable to Campton
and his kind would crumble in new ruins above the old. Yes?but woe to
them by whom such things came; woe to the generation that bowed to such
a law! The Powers of Darkness were always watching and seeking their
hour; but the past was a record of their failures as well as of their
triumphs. Campton, brushing up his history, remembered the great
turning-points of progress, saw how the liberties of England had been
born of the ruthless discipline of the Norman conquest, and how even out
of the hideous welter of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic wars
had come more freedom and a wiser order. The point was to remember that
the efficacy of the sacrifice was always in proportion to the worth of
the victims; and there at least his faith was sure.

He could not, he felt, leave his former wife’s appeal unnoticed; after a
day or two he wrote to George, telling him of Mrs. Brant’s anxiety, and
asking in vague terms if George himself thought any change in his
situation probable. His letter ended abruptly: “I suppose it’s hardly
time yet to ask for leave??”




                                  XVII


Not long after his midnight tramp with Boylston and Dastrey the post
brought Campton two letters. One was postmarked Paris, the other bore
the military frank and was addressed in his son’s hand: he laid it aside
while he glanced at the first. It contained an engraved card:

         +---------------------------------------------------+
         |                                                   |
         |              _Mrs. Anderson Brant_                |
         |                                                   |
         |      _At Home on February 20th at 4 o’clock_      |
         |                                                   |
         |  _Mr. Harvey Mayhew will give an account of his   |
         |                captivity in Germany               |
         |            Mme. de Dolmetsch will sing_           |
         |                                                   |
         |  _For the benefit of the “Friends of French Art   |
         |                    Committee”_                    |
         |                                                   |
         |                _Tickets 100 francs_               |
         |                                                   |
         +---------------------------------------------------+

Enclosed was the circular of the sub-committee in aid of Musicians at
the Front, with which Campton was not directly associated. It bore the
names of Mrs. Talkett, Mme. Beausite and a number of other French and
American ladies.

Campton tossed the card away. He was not annoyed by the invitation: he
knew that Miss Anthony and Mlle. Davril were getting up a series of
drawing-room entertainments for that branch of the charity, and that the
card had been sent to him as a member of the Honorary Committee. But any
reminder of the sort always gave a sharp twitch to the Brant nerve in
him. He turned to George’s letter.

It was no longer than usual; but in other respects it was unlike his
son’s previous communications. Campton read it over two or three times.


“Dear Dad, thanks for yours of the tenth, which must have come to me on
skis, the snow here is so deep.” (There had, in fact, been a heavy
snow-fall in the Argonne). “Sorry mother is bothering about things
again; as you’ve often reminded me, they always have a way of ‘being as
they will be,’ and even war doesn’t seem to change it. Nothing to worry
her in my case?but you can’t expect her to believe that, can you?
Neither you nor I can help it, I suppose.

“There’s one thing that might help, though; and that is, your letting
her feel that you’re a little nearer to her. War makes a lot of things
look differently, especially this sedentary kind of war: it’s rather
like going over all the old odds-and-ends in one’s cupboards. And some
of them do look so foolish.

“I wish you’d see her now and then?just naturally, as if it had
happened. You know you’ve got one Inexhaustible Topic between you. The
said I. T. is doing well, and has nothing new to communicate up to now
except a change of address. Hereafter please write to my Base instead of
directing here, as there’s some chance of a shift of H.Q. The precaution
is probably just a new twist of the old red tape, signifying nothing;
but Base will always reach me if we _are_ shifted. Let mother know, and
explain, please; otherwise she’ll think the unthinkable.

“Interrupted by big drive?quill-drive, of course!

                                “As ever
                         “GEORGIUS SCRIBLERIUS.

“P.S. Don’t be too savage to Uncle Andy either.

“No. 2.?I _had_ thought of leave; but perhaps you’re right about that.”


It was the first time George had written in that way of his mother. His
smiling policy had always been to let things alone, and go on
impartially dividing his devotion between his parents, since they
refused to share even that common blessing. But war gave everything a
new look; and he had evidently, as he put it, been turning over the old
things in his cupboards. How was it possible, Campton wondered, that
after such a turning over he was still content to write “Nothing new to
communicate,” and to make jokes about another big quill-drive? Glancing
at the date of the letter, Campton saw that it had been written on the
day after the first ineffectual infantry assault on Vauquois. And George
was sitting a few miles off, safe in headquarters at Sainte Menehould,
with a stout roof over his head and a beautiful brown gloss on his
boots, scribbling punning letters while his comrades fell back from that
bloody summit....

Suddenly Campton’s eyes filled. No; George had not written that letter
for the sake of the joke: the joke was meant to cover what went before
it. Ah, how young the boy was to imagine that his father would not see!
Yes, as he said, war made so many of the old things look foolish....

Campton set out for the Palais Royal. He felt happier than for a long
time past: the tone of his boy’s letter seemed to correspond with his
own secret change of spirit. He knew the futility of attempting to bring
the Brants and himself together, but was glad that George had made the
suggestion. He resolved to see Julia that afternoon.

At the Palais Royal he found the indefatigable Boylston busy with an
exhibition of paintings sent home from the front, and Mlle. Davril
helping to catalogue them. Lamentable pensioners came and went, bringing
fresh tales of death, fresh details of savagery; the air was dark with
poverty and sorrow. In the background Mme. Beausite flitted about,
tragic and ineffectual. Boylston had not been able to extract a penny
from Beausite for his secretary and the latter’s left-handed family; but
Mme. Beausite had discovered a newly-organized charity which lent money
to “temporarily embarrassed” war-victims; and with an artless
self-satisfaction she had contrived to obtain a small loan for the
victim of her own thrift. “For what other purpose are such charities
founded?” she said, gently disclaiming in advance the praise which Miss
Anthony and Boylston had no thought of offering her. Whenever Campton
came in she effaced herself behind a desk, where she bent her beautiful
white head over a card-catalogue without any perceptible results.

The telephone rang. Boylston, after a moment, looked up from the
receiver.

“Mr. Campton!”

The painter glanced apprehensively at the instrument, which still seemed
to him charged with explosives.

“Take the message, do. The thing always snaps at me.”

There was a listening pause: then Boylston said: “It’s about Upsher??”

Campton started up. “Killed???”

“Not sure. It’s Mr. Brant. The news was wired to the bank; they want you
to break it to Mr. Mayhew.”

“Oh, Lord,” the painter groaned, the boy’s face suddenly rising before
his blurred eyes. Miss Anthony was not at the office that morning, or he
would have turned to her; at least she might have gone with him on his
quest. He could not ask Boylston to leave the office, and he felt that
curious incapacity to deal with the raw fact of sorrow which had often
given an elfin unreality to the most poignant moments of his life. It
was as though experience had to enter into the very substance of his
soul before he could even feel it.

“Other people,” he thought, “would know what to say, and I shan’t....”

Some one, meanwhile, had fetched a cab, and he drove to the Nouveau
Luxe, though with little hope of finding Mr. Mayhew. But Mr. Mayhew had
grown two secretaries, and turned the shrimp-pink drawing-room into an
office. One of the secretaries was there, hammering at a typewriter. She
was a competent young woman, who instantly extracted from her
pocket-diary the fact that her chief was at Mrs. Anderson Brant’s,
rehearsing.

“Rehearsing???”

“Why, yes; he’s to speak at Mrs. Brant’s next week on Atrocities,” she
said, surprised at Campton’s ignorance.

She suggested telephoning; but in the shrunken households of the rich,
where but one or two servants remained, telephoning had become as
difficult as in the understaffed hotels; and after one or two vain
attempts Campton decided to go to the Avenue Marigny. He felt that to
get hold of Mayhew as soon as possible might still in some vague way
help poor Benny?since it was not yet sure that he was dead. “Or else
it’s just the need to rush about,” he thought, conscious that the only
way he had yet found of dealing with calamity was a kind of ant-like
agitation.

On the way the round pink face of Benny Upsher continued to float before
him in its very substance, with the tangibility that only a painter’s
visions wear. “I want to be _in_ this thing,” he heard the boy
repeating, as if impelled by some blind instinct flowing down through
centuries and centuries of persistent childish minds.

“If he or his forebears had ever thought things out he probably would
have been alive and safe to-day,” Campton mused, “like George.... The
average person is always just obeying impulses stored up thousands of
years ago, and never re-examined since.” But this consideration, though
drawn from George’s own philosophy, did not greatly comfort his father.

At the Brants’ a bewildered concierge admitted him and rang a bell which
no one answered. The vestibule and the stairs were piled with bales of
sheeting, bulging jute-bags, stacked-up hospital supplies. A boy in
scout’s uniform swung inadequate legs from the lofty porter’s armchair
beside the table with its monumental bronze inkstand. Finally, from
above, a maid called to Campton to ascend.

In the drawing-room pictures and tapestries, bronzes and _pates
tendres_, had vanished, and a plain moquette replaced the priceless
Savonnerie across whose pompous garlands Campton had walked on the day
of his last visit.

The maid led him to the ball-room. Through double doors of glass Mr.
Mayhew’s oratorical accents, accompanied by faint chords on the piano,
reached Campton’s ears: he paused and looked. At the far end of the
great gilded room, on a platform backed by velvet draperies, stood Mr.
Mayhew, a perfect pearl in his tie and a perfect crease in his trousers.
Beside him was a stage-property tripod surmounted by a classical
perfume-burner; and on it Mme. de Dolmetsch, swathed in black, leaned in
an attitude of affliction.

Beneath the platform a bushy-headed pianist struck an occasional chord
from Chopin’s Dead March; and near the door three or four Red Cross
nurses perched on bales of blankets and listened. Under one of their
coifs Campton recognized Mrs. Talkett. She saw him and made a sign to
the lady nearest her; and the latter, turning, revealed the astonished
eyes of Julia Brant.

Campton’s first impression, while they shook hands under cover of Mr.
Mayhew’s rolling periods, was of his former wife’s gift of adaptation.
She had made herself a nurse’s face; not a theatrical imitation of it
like Mme. de Dolmetsch’s, nor yet the face of a nurse on a war-poster,
like Mrs. Talkett’s. Her lovely hair smoothed away under her strict
coif, her chin devoutly framed in linen, Mrs. Brant looked serious,
tender and efficient. Was it possible that she had found her vocation?

She gave him a glance of alarm, but his eyes must have told her that he
had not come about George, for with a reassured smile she laid a finger
on her lip and pointed to the platform; Campton noticed that her nails
were as beautifully polished as ever.

Mr. Mayhew was saying: “All that I have to give, yes, all that is most
precious to me, I am ready to surrender, to offer up, to lay down in the
Great Struggle which is to save the world from barbarism. I, who was one
of the first Victims of that barbarism....”

He paused and looked impressively at the bales of blankets. The piano
filled in the pause, and Mme. de Dolmetsch, without changing her
attitude, almost without moving her lips, sang a few notes of
lamentation.

“Of that hideous barbarism??” Mr. Mayhew began again. “I repeat that I
stand here ready to give up everything I hold most dear??”

“Do stop him,” Campton whispered to Mrs. Brant.

Little Mrs. Talkett, with the quick intuition he had noted in her,
sprang up and threaded her way to the stage. Mme. de Dolmetsch flowed
from one widowed pose into another, and Mr. Mayhew, majestically
descending, approached Mrs. Brant.

“You agree with me, I hope? You feel that anything more than Mme. de
Dolmetsch’s beautiful voice?anything in the way of a choral
accompaniment?would only weaken my effect? Where the facts are so
overwhelming it is enough to state them; that is,” Mr. Mayhew added
modestly, “if they are stated vigorously and tersely?as I hope they
are.”

Mme. de Dolmetsch, with the gesture of a marble mourner torn from her
cenotaph, glided up behind him and laid her hand in Campton’s.

“Dear friend, you’ve heard?... You remember our talk? I am Cassandra,
cursed with the hideous gift of divination.” Tears rained down her
cheeks, washing off the paint like mud swept by a shower. “My only
comfort,” she added, fixing her perfect eyes on Mr. Mayhew, “is to help
our great good friend in this crusade against the assassins of my
Ladislas.”

Mrs. Talkett had said a word to Mr. Mayhew. Campton saw his complacent
face go to pieces as if it had been vitrioled.

“Benny?Benny??” he screamed, “Benny hurt? My Benny? It’s some mistake!
What makes you think???” His eyes met Campton’s. “Oh, my God! Why, he’s
my sister’s child!” he cried, plunging his face into his soft manicured
hands.

In the cab to which Campton led him, he continued to sob with the
full-throated sobs of a large invertebrate distress, beating his breast
for an unfindable handkerchief, and, when he found it, immediately
weeping it into pulp.

Campton had meant to leave him at the bank; but when the taxi stopped
Mr. Mayhew was in too pitiful a plight for the painter to resist his
entreaty.

“It was you who saw Benny last?you can’t leave me!” the poor man
implored; and Campton followed him up the majestic stairway.

Their names were taken in to Mr. Brant, and with a motion of wonder at
the unaccountable humours of fate, Campton found himself for the first
time entering the banker’s private office.

Mr. Brant was elsewhere in the great glazed labyrinth, and while the
visitors waited, the painter’s registering eye took in the details of
the room, from the Barye _cire-perdue_ on a peach-coloured marble mantel
to the blue morocco armchairs about a giant writing-table. On the table
was an electric lamp in a celadon vase, and just the right number of
neatly folded papers lay under a paper-weight of Chinese crystal. The
room was as tidy as an expensive stage-setting or the cage of a
well-kept canary: the only object marring its order was a telegram lying
open on the desk.

Mr. Brant, grey and glossy, slipped in on noiseless patent leather. He
shook hands with Mr. Mayhew, bowed stiffly but deprecatingly to Campton,
gave his usual cough, and said: “This is terrible.”

And suddenly, as the three men sat there, so impressive and important
and powerless, with that fatal telegram marring the tidiness of the
desk, Campton murmured to himself: “If this thing were to happen to me I
couldn’t bear it.... I simply couldn’t bear it....”

Benny Upsher was not dead?at least his death was not certain. He had
been seen to fall in a surprise attack near Neuve Chapelle; the
telegram, from his commanding officer, reported him as “wounded and
missing.”

The words had taken on a hideous significance in the last months.
Freezing to death between the lines, mutilation and torture, or weeks of
slow agony in German hospitals: these were the alternative visions
associated with the now familiar formula. Mr. Mayhew had spent a part of
his time collecting details about the treatment of those who had fallen,
alive but wounded, into German hands; and Campton guessed that as he sat
there every one of these details, cruel, sanguinary, remorseless, had
started to life, and that all their victims wore the face of Benny.

The wretched man sat speechless, so unhinged and swinging loose in his
grief that Mr. Brant and Campton could only look on, following the
thoughts he was thinking, seeing the sights he was seeing, and each
avoiding the other’s eye lest they should betray to one another the
secret of their shared exultation at George’s safety.

Finally Mr. Mayhew was put in charge of a confidential clerk, who was to
go with him to the English Military Mission in the hope of getting
farther information. He went away, small and shrunken, with the
deprecating smile of a man who seeks to ward off a blow; as he left the
room Campton heard him say timidly to the clerk: “No doubt you speak
French, sir? The words I want don’t seem to come to me.”

Campton had meant to leave at the same time; but some vague impulse held
him back. He remembered George’s postscript: “Don’t be too savage to
Uncle Andy,” and wished he could think of some friendly phrase to ease
off his leave-taking. Mr. Brant seemed to have the same wish. He stood,
erect and tightly buttoned, one small hand resting on the arm of his
desk-chair, as though he were posing for a cabinet size, with the
photographer telling him to look natural. His lids twitched behind his
protective glasses, and his upper lip, which was as straight as a ruler,
detached itself by a hair’s breadth from the lower; but no word came.

Campton glanced up and down the white-panelled walls, and spoke
abruptly.

“There was no reason on earth,” he said, “why poor young Upsher should
ever have been in this thing.”

Mr. Brant bowed.

“This sort of crazy impulse to rush into other people’s rows,” Campton
continued with rising vehemence, “is of no more use to a civilized state
than any other unreasoned instinct. At bottom it’s nothing but what
George calls the baseball spirit: just an ignorant passion for
fisticuffs.”

Mr. Brant looked at him intently. “When did?George say that?” he asked,
with his usual cough before the name.

Campton coloured. “Oh?er?some time ago: in the very beginning, I think.
It was the view of most thoughtful young fellows at that time.”

“Quite so,” said Mr. Brant, cautiously stroking his moustache.

Campton’s eyes again wandered about the room.

“_Now_, of course??”

“Ah?_now_....”

The two men looked at each other, and Campton held out his hand. Mr.
Brant, growing pink about the forehead, extended his dry fingers, and
they shook hands in silence.




                                 XVIII


In the street Campton looked about him with the same confused sense as
when he had watched Fortin-Lescluze driving away to Chalons, his dead
son’s image in his eyes.

Each time that Campton came in contact with people on whom this calamity
had fallen he grew more acutely aware of his own inadequacy. If he had
been Fortin-Lescluze it would have been impossible for him to go back to
Chalons and resume his task. If he had been Harvey Mayhew, still less
could he have accommodated himself to the intolerable, the really
inconceivable, thought that Benny Upsher had vanished into that fiery
furnace like a crumpled letter tossed into a grate. Young Fortin was
defending his country?but Upsher, in God’s name what was Benny Upsher of
Connecticut doing in a war between the continental powers?

Suddenly Campton remembered that he had George’s letter in his pocket,
and that he had meant to go back with it to Mrs. Brant’s. He had started
out that morning full of the good intentions the letter had inspired;
but now he had no heart to carry them out. Yet George had said: “Let
mother know, and explain, please;” and such an injunction could not be
disregarded.

He was still hesitating on a street corner when he remembered that Miss
Anthony was probably on her way home for luncheon, and that if he made
haste he might find her despatching her hurried meal. It was instinctive
with him, in difficult hours, to turn to her, less for counsel than for
shelter; her simple unperplexed view of things was as comforting as his
mother’s solution of the dark riddles he used to propound in the
nursery.

He found her in her little dining-room, with Delft plates askew on
imitation Cordova leather, and a Death’s Head Pennon and a Prussian
helmet surmounting the nymph in cast bronze on the mantelpiece. In
entering he faced the relentless light of a ground-glass window opening
on an air-shaft; and Miss Anthony, flinging him a look, dropped her fork
and sprang up crying: “George??”

“George?why George?” Campton recovered his presence of mind under the
shock of her agitation. “What made you think of George?”

“Your?your face,” she stammered, sitting down again. “So absurd of
me.... But you looked.... A seat for monsieur, Jeanne,” she cried over
her shoulder to the pantry.

“Ah?my face? Yes, I suppose so. Benny Upsher has disappeared?I’ve just
had to break it to Mayhew.”

“Oh, that poor young Upsher? How dreadful!” Her own face grew instantly
serene. “I’m so sorry?so very sorry.... Yes, yes, you _shall_ lunch with
me?I know there’s another cutlet,” she insisted.

He shook his head. “I couldn’t.”

“Well, then, I’ve finished.” She led the way into the drawing-room.
There it was her turn to face the light, and he saw that her own
features were as perturbed as she had apparently discovered his to be.

“Poor Benny, poor boy!” she repeated, in the happy voice she might have
had if she had been congratulating Campton on the lad’s escape. He saw
that she was still thinking not of Upsher but of George, and her
inability to fit her intonation to her words betrayed the violence of
her relief. But why had she imagined George to be in danger?

Campton recounted the scene at which he had just assisted, and while she
continued to murmur her sympathy he asked abruptly: “Why on earth should
you have been afraid for George?”

Miss Anthony had taken her usual armchair. It was placed, as the
armchairs of elderly ladies usually are, with its high back to the
light, and Campton could no longer observe the discrepancy between her
words and her looks. This probably gave her laugh its note of
confidence. “My dear, if you were to cut me open George’s name would run
out of every vein,” she said.

“But in that tone?it was your tone. You thought he’d been?that something
had happened,” Campton insisted. “How could it, where he is?”

She shrugged her shoulders in the “foreign” way she had picked up in her
youth. The gesture was as incongruous as her slang, but it had become
part of her physical self, which lay in a loose mosaic of incongruities
over the solid crystal block of her character.

“Why, indeed? I suppose there are risks everywhere, aren’t there?”

“I don’t know.” He pulled out the letter he had received that morning. A
sudden light had illuminated it, and his hand shook. “I don’t even know
where George is any longer.”

She seemed to hesitate for a moment, and then asked calmly: “What do you
mean?”

“Here?look at this. We’re to write to his base. I’m to tell his mother
of the change.” He waited, cursing the faint winter light, and the
protecting back of her chair. “What can it mean,” he broke out, “except
that he’s left Sainte Menehould, that he’s been sent elsewhere, and that
he doesn’t want us to find out where?”

Miss Anthony bent her long nose over the page. Her hand held the letter
steadily, and he guessed, as she perused it, that she had had one of the
same kind, and had already drawn her own conclusions. What they were,
that first startled “George!” seemed to say. But would she ever let
Campton see as far into her thoughts again? He continued to watch her
hands patiently, since nothing was to be discovered of her face. The
hands folded the letter with precision, and handed it back to him.

“Yes: I see why you thought that?one might have,” she surprised him by
conceding. Then, darting at his unprotected face a gaze he seemed to
feel though he could not see it: “If it had meant that George had been
ordered to the front, how would you have felt?” she demanded.

He had not expected the question, and though in the last weeks he had so
often propounded it to himself, it caught him in the chest like a blow.
A sense of humiliation, a longing to lay his weakness bare, suddenly
rose in him, and he bowed his head. “I couldn’t ... I couldn’t bear it,”
he stammered.

She was silent for an interval; then she stood up, and laying her hand
on his shaking shoulder crossed the room to a desk in which he knew she
kept her private papers. Her keys clinked, and a moment later she handed
him a letter. It was in George’s writing, and dated on the same day as
his own.

“Dearest old girl, nothing new but my address. Hereafter please write to
our Base. This order has just been lowered from the empyrean at the end
of an endless reel of red tape. What it means nobody knows. It does not
appear to imply an immediate change of Headquarters; but even if such a
change comes, my job is likely to remain the same. I’m getting used to
it, and no wonder, for one day differeth not from another, and I’ve had
many of them now. Take care of Dad and mother, and of your matchless
self. I’m writing to father to-day. Your George the First?and Last (or
I’ll know why).”

The two letters bore one another out in a way which carried conviction.
Campton saw that his sudden doubts must have been produced (since he had
not felt them that morning) by the agonizing experience he had
undergone: the vision of Benny Upsher had unmanned him. George was safe,
and asked only to remain so: that was evident from both letters. And as
the certainty of his son’s acquiescence once more penetrated Campton it
brought with it a fresh reaction of shame. Ashamed?yes, he had begun to
be ashamed of George as well as of himself. Under the touch of Adele
Anthony’s implacable honesty his last pretenses shrivelled up, and he
longed to abase himself. He lifted his head and looked at her,
remembering all she would be able to read in his eyes.

“You’re satisfied?” she enquired.

“Yes. If that’s the word.” He stretched his hand toward her, and then
drew it back. “But it’s _not_: it’s not the word any longer.” He
laboured with the need of self-expression, and the opposing instinct of
concealing feelings too complex for Miss Anthony’s simple gaze. How
could he say: “I’m satisfied; but I wish to God that George were not”?
And was he satisfied, after all? And how could he define, or even be
sure that he was actually experiencing, a feeling so contradictory that
it seemed to be made up of anxiety for his son’s safety, shame at that
anxiety, shame at George’s own complacent acceptance of his lot, and
terror of a possible change in that lot? There were hours when it seemed
to Campton that the Furies were listening, and ready to fling their
awful answer to him if he as much as whispered to himself: “Would to God
that George were not satisfied!”

The sense of their haunting presence laid its clutch on him, and caused
him, after a pause, to finish his phrase in another tone. “No;
satisfied’s not the word; I’m _glad_ George is out of it!” he exclaimed.

Miss Anthony was folding away the letter as calmly as if it had been a
refugee record. She did not appear to notice the change in Campton’s
voice.

“I don’t pretend to your sublime detachment: you’ve never had a child,”
he sneered. (Certainly, if the Furies were listening, they would put
that down to his credit!)

“Oh, my poor John,” she said; then she locked the desk, took her hat
from the lamp-chimney on which it had been hanging, jammed it down on
her head like a helmet, and remarked: “We’ll go together, shall we? It’s
time I got back to the office.”

On the way downstairs both were silent. Campton’s ears echoed with his
stupid taunt, and he glanced at her without daring to speak. On the last
landing she paused and said: “I’ll see Julia this evening about George’s
change of address. She may be worried; and I can explain?I can take her
my letter.”

“Oh, do,” he assented. “And tell her?tell her?if she needs me??”

It was as much of a message as he found courage for. Miss Anthony
nodded.




                                  XIX


One day Mme. Lebel said: “The first horse-chestnuts are in bloom. And
monsieur must really buy himself some new shirts.”

Campton looked at her in surprise. She spoke in a different voice; he
wondered if she had had good news of her grandchildren. Then he saw that
the furrows in her old face were as deep as ever, and that the change in
her voice was simply an unconscious response to the general stirring of
sap, the spring need to go on living, through everything and in spite of
everything.

_On se fait une raison_, as Mme. Lebel would have said. Life had to go
on, and new shirts had to be bought. No one knew why it was necessary,
but every one felt that it was; and here were the horse-chestnuts once
more actively confirming it. Habit laid its compelling grasp on the
wires of the poor broken marionettes with which the Furies had been
playing, and they responded, though with feebler flappings, to the
accustomed jerk.

In Campton the stirring of the sap had been a cold and languid process,
chiefly felt in his reluctance to go on with his relief work. He had
tried to close his ears to the whispers of his own lassitude, vexed,
after the first impulse of self-dedication, to find that no vocation
declared itself, that his task became each day more tedious as well as
more painful. Theoretically, the pain ought to have stimulated him:
perpetual immersion in that sea of anguish should have quickened his
effort to help the poor creatures sinking under its waves. The woe of
the war had had that effect on Adele Anthony, on young Boylston, on
Mlle. Davril, on the greater number of his friends. But their ardour
left him cold. He wanted to help, he wanted it, he was sure, as
earnestly as they; but the longing was not an inspiration to him, and he
felt more and more that to work listlessly was to work ineffectually.

“I give the poor devils so many boots and money-orders a day; you give
them yourself, and so does Boylston,” he complained to Miss Anthony; who
murmured: “Ah, _Boylston_??” as if that point of the remark were alone
worth noticing.

“At his age too; it’s extraordinary, the way the boy’s got out of
himself.”

“Or into himself, rather. He _was_ a pottering boy before?now he’s a
man, with a man’s sense of things.”

“Yes; but his patience, his way of getting into their minds, their
prejudices, their meannesses, their miseries! He doesn’t seem to me like
the kind who was meant to be a missionary.”

“Not a bit of it.... But he’s burnt up with shame at our not being in
the war?as all the young Americans are.”

Campton made an impatient movement. “Benny Upsher again??! Can’t we let
our government decide all that for us? What else did we elect it for, I
wonder?”

“I wonder,” echoed Miss Anthony.

Talks of this kind were irritating and unprofitable, and Campton did not
again raise the question. Miss Anthony’s vision was too simplifying to
penetrate far into his doubts, and after nearly a year’s incessant
contact with the most savage realities her mind still seemed at ease in
its old formulas.

Simplicity, after all, was the best safeguard in such hours. Mrs. Brant
was as absorbed in her task as Adele Anthony. Since the Brant villa at
Deauville had been turned into a hospital she was always on the road, in
a refulgent new motor emblazoned with a Red Cross, carrying supplies,
rushing down with great surgeons, hurrying back to committee meetings
and conferences with the Service de Sante (for she and Mr. Brant were
now among the leaders in American relief work in Paris), and throwing
open the Avenue Marigny drawing-rooms for concerts, lectures and such
sober philanthropic gaieties as society was beginning to countenance.

On the day when Mme. Lebel told Campton that the horse-chestnuts were in
blossom and he must buy some new shirts he was particularly in need of
such incentives. He had made up his mind to go to see Mrs. Brant about a
concert for “The Friends of French Art” which was to be held in her
house. Ever since George had asked him to see something of his mother
Campton had used the pretext of charitable collaboration as the best way
of getting over their fundamental lack of anything to say to each other.

The appearance of the Champs Elysees confirmed Mme. Lebel’s
announcement. Everywhere the punctual rosy spikes were rising above
unfolding green; and Campton, looking up at them, remembered once
thinking how Nature had adapted herself to the scene in overhanging with
her own pink lamps and green fans the lamps and fans of the _cafes
chantants_ beneath. The latter lights had long since been extinguished,
the fans folded up; and as he passed the bent and broken arches of
electric light, the iron chairs and dead plants in paintless boxes, all
heaped up like the scenery of a bankrupt theatre, he felt the pang of
Nature’s obstinate renewal in a world of death. Yet he also felt the
stir of the blossoming trees in the form of a more restless discontent,
a duller despair, a new sense of inadequacy. How could war go on when
spring had come?

Mrs. Brant, having reduced her household and given over her
drawing-rooms to charity, received in her boudoir, a small room
contrived by a clever upholsterer to simulate a seclusion of which she
had never felt the need. Photographs strewed the low tables; and facing
the door Campton saw George’s last portrait, in uniform, enclosed in an
expensive frame. Campton had received the same photograph, and thrust it
into a drawer; he thought a young man on a safe staff job rather
ridiculous in uniform, and at the same time the sight filled him with a
secret dread.

Mrs. Brant was bidding goodbye to a lady in mourning whom Campton did
not know. His approach through the carpeted antechamber had been
unnoticed, and as he entered the room he heard Mrs. Brant say in French,
apparently in reply to a remark of her visitor: “Bridge, _chere Madame_?
No; not yet. I confess I haven’t the courage to take up my old life. We
mothers with sons at the front....”

“Ah,” exclaimed the other lady, “there I don’t agree with you. I think
one owes it to them to go on as if one were as little afraid as _they_
are. That is what all my sons prefer.... Even,” she added, lowering her
voice but lifting her head higher, “even, I’m sure, the one who is
buried by the Marne.” With a flush on her handsome face she pressed Mrs.
Brant’s hand and passed out.

Mrs. Brant had caught sight of Campton as she received the rebuke. Her
colour rose slightly, and she said with a smile: “So many women can’t
get on without amusement.”

“No,” he agreed. There was a pause, and then he asked: “Who was it?”

“The Marquise de Tranlay?the widow.”

“Where are the sons she spoke of?”

“There are three left: one in the _Chasseurs a Pied_; the youngest, who
volunteered at seventeen, in the artillery in the Argonne; the third,
badly wounded, in hospital at Compiegne. And the eldest killed. I simply
can’t understand....”

“Why,” Campton interrupted, “did you speak as if George were at the
front? Do you usually speak of him in that way?”

Her silence and her deepening flush made him feel the unkindness of the
question. “I didn’t mean ... forgive me,” he said. “Only sometimes, when
I see women like that I’m??”

“Well?” she questioned.

He was silent in his turn, and she did not insist. They sat facing each
other, each forgetting the purpose of their meeting. For the hundredth
time he felt the uselessness of trying to carry out George’s filial
injunction: between himself and George’s mother these months of fiery
trial seemed to have loosed instead of tightening the links.

He wandered back to Montmartre through the bereft and beautiful city.
The light lay on it in wide silvery washes, harmonizing the grey stone,
the pale foliage, and a sky piled with clouds which seemed to rebuild in
translucid masses the monuments below. He caught himself once more
viewing the details of the scene in the terms of his trade. River,
pavements, terraces heavy with trees, the whole crowded sky-line from
Notre Dame to the Pantheon, instead of presenting themselves in their
bare reality, were transposed into a painter’s vision. And the faces
around him became again the starting-point of rapid incessant
combinations of line and colour, as if the visible world were once more
at its old trick of weaving itself into magic designs. The reawakening
of this instinct deepened Campton’s sense of unrest, and made him feel
more than ever unfitted for a life in which such things were no longer
of account, in which it seemed a disloyalty even to think of them.

He returned to the studio, having promised to deal with some office work
which he had carried home the night before. The papers lay on the table;
but he turned to the window and looked out over his budding lilacs at
the new strange Paris. He remembered that it was almost a year since he
had leaned in the same place, gazing down on the wise and frivolous old
city in her summer dishabille while he planned his journey to Africa
with George; and something George had once quoted from Faust came
drifting through his mind: “Take care! You’ve broken my beautiful world!
There’ll be splinters....” Ah, yes, splinters, splinters ... everybody’s
hands were red with them! What retribution devised by man could be
commensurate with the crime of destroying his beautiful world? Campton
sat down to the task of collating office files.

His bell rang, and he started up, as much surprised as if the simplest
events had become unusual. It would be natural enough that Dastrey or
Boylston should drop in?or even Adele Anthony?but his heart beat as if
it might be George. He limped to the door, and found Mrs. Talkett.

She said: “May I come in?” and did so without waiting for his answer.
The rapidity of her entrance surprised him less than the change in her
appearance. But for the one glimpse of her dishevelled elegance, when
she had rushed into Mrs. Brant’s drawing-room on the day after war was
declared, he had seen her only in a nursing uniform, as absorbed in her
work as if it had been a long-thwarted vocation. Now she stood before
him in raiment so delicately springlike that it seemed an emanation of
the day. Care had dropped from her with her professional garb, and she
smiled as though he must guess the reason.

In ordinary times he would have thought: “She’s in love??” but that
explanation was one which seemed to belong to other days. It reminded
him, however, how little he knew of Mrs. Talkett, who, after Rene
Davril’s death, had vanished from his life as abruptly as she had
entered it. Allusions to “the Talketts,” picked up now and again at
Adele Anthony’s, led him to conjecture an invisible husband in the
background; but all he knew of Mrs. Talkett was what she had told him of
her “artistic” yearnings, and what he had been able to divine from her
empty questioning eyes, from certain sweet inflections when she spoke of
her wounded soldiers, and from the precise and finished language with
which she clothed her unfinished and imprecise thoughts. All these
indications made up an image not unlike that of the fashion-plate torn
from its context of which she had reminded him at their first meeting;
and he looked at her with indifference, wondering why she had come.

With an abrupt gesture she pulled the pin from her heavily-plumed hat,
tossed it on the divan, and said: “Dear Master, I just want to sit with
you and have you talk to me.” She dropped down beside her hat, clasped
her thin hands about her thin knee, and broke out, as if she had already
forgotten that she wanted him to talk to her: “Do you know, I’ve made up
my mind to begin to live again?to live my own life, I mean, to be my
real _me_, after all these dreadful months of exile from myself. I see
now _that_ that is my real duty?just as it is yours, just as it is that
of every artist and every creator. Don’t you feel as I do? Don’t you
agree with me? We _must_ save Beauty for the world; before it is too
late we must save it out of this awful wreck and ruin. It sounds
ridiculously presumptuous, doesn’t it, to say ‘we’ in talking of a great
genius like you and a poor little speck of dust like me? But after all
there is the same instinct in us, the same craving, the same desire to
realize Beauty, though you do it so magnificently and so?so objectively,
and I ...” she paused, unclasped her hands, and lifted her lovely
bewildered eyes, “I do it only by a ribbon in my hair, a flower in a
vase, a way of looping a curtain, or placing a lacquer screen in the
right light. But I oughtn’t to be ashamed of my limitations, do you
think I ought? Surely every one ought to be helping to save Beauty;
every one is needed, even the humblest and most ignorant of us, or else
the world will be all death and ugliness. And after all, ugliness is the
only _real_ death, isn’t it?” She drew a deep breath and added: “It has
done me good already to sit here and listen to you.”

Campton, a few weeks previously, would have been amused, or perhaps
merely irritated. But in the interval he had become aware in himself of
the same irresistible craving to “live,” as she put it, and as he had
heard it formulated, that very day, by the mourning mother who had so
sharply rebuked Mrs. Brant. The spring was stirring them all in their
different ways, secreting in them the sap which craved to burst into
bridge-parties, or the painting of masterpieces, or a consciousness of
the need for new shirts.

“But what am I in all this?” Mrs. Talkett rushed on, sparing him the
trouble of a reply. “Nothing but the match that lights the flame!
Sometimes I imagine that I might put what I mean into poetry ... I
_have_ scribbled a few things, you know ... but that’s not what I was
going to tell you. It’s you, dear Master, who must set us the example of
getting back to our work, our real work, whatever it is. What have you
done in all these dreadful months?the real You? Nothing! And the world
will be the poorer for it ever after. Master, you must paint again?you
must begin to-day!”

Campton gave an uneasy laugh. “Oh?paint!” He waved his hand toward the
office files of “The Friends of French Art.” “There’s my work.”

“Not the real you. It’s your dummy’s work?just as my nursing has been
mine. Oh, one did one’s best?but all the while beauty and art and the
eternal things were perishing! And what will the world be like without
them?”

“I shan’t be here,” Campton growled.

“But your son will.” She looked at him profoundly. “You know I know your
son?we’re friends. And I’m sure he would feel as I feel?he would tell
you to go back to your painting.”

For months past any allusion to George had put Campton on his guard,
stiffening him with improvised defences. But this appeal of Mrs.
Talkett’s found him unprepared, demoralized by the spring sweetness, and
by his secret sense of his son’s connivance with it. What was war?any
war?but an old European disease, an ancestral blood-madness seizing on
the first pretext to slake its frenzy? Campton reminded himself again
that he was the son of free institutions, of a country in no way
responsible for the centuries of sinister diplomacy which had brought
Europe to ruin, and was now trying to drag down America. George was
right, the Brants were right, this young woman through whose lips
Campton’s own secret instinct spoke was right.

He was silent so long that she rose with the anxious frown that appeared
to be her way of blushing, and faltered out: “I’m boring you?I’d better
go.”

She picked up her hat and held its cataract of feathers poised above her
slanted head.

“Wait?let me do you like that!” Campton cried. It had never before
occurred to him that she was paintable; but as she stood there with
uplifted arm the long line flowing from her wrist to her hip suddenly
wound itself about him like a net.

“Me?” she stammered, standing motionless, as if frightened by the excess
of her triumph.

“Do you mind?” he queried; and hardly hearing her faltered out: “Mind?
When it was what I came for!” he dragged forth an easel, flung on it the
first canvas he could lay hands on (though he knew it was the wrong
shape and size), and found himself instantly transported into the lost
world which was the only real one.




                                   XX


For a month Campton painted on in transcendent bliss.

His first stroke carried him out of space and time, into a region where
all that had become numbed and atrophied in him could expand and
breathe. Lines, images, colours were again the sole facts: he plunged
into their whirling circles like a stranded sea-creature into the sea.
Once more every face was not a vague hieroglyph, a curtain drawn before
an invisible aggregate of wants and woes, but a work of art, a flower in
a pattern, to be dealt with on its own merits, like a bronze or a jewel.
During the first day or two his hand halted; but the sense of
insufficiency was a goad, and he fought with his subject till he felt a
strange ease in every renovated muscle, and his model became like a
musical instrument on which he played with careless mastery.

He had transferred his easel to Mrs. Talkett’s apartment. It was an odd
patchwork place, full of bold beginnings and doubtful pauses, rash
surrenders to the newest fashions and abrupt insurrections against them,
where Louis Philippe mahogany had entrenched itself against the
aggression of _art nouveau_ hangings, and the frail grace of
eighteenth-century armchairs shed derision on lumpy modern furniture
painted like hobby-horses at a fair. It amused Campton to do Mrs.
Talkett against such a background: her thin personality needed to be
filled out by the visible results of its many quests and cravings. There
were people one could sit down before a blank wall, and all their world
was there, in the curves of their faces and the way their hands lay in
their laps; others, like Mrs. Talkett, seemed to be made out of the
reflection of what surrounded them, as if they had been born of a tricky
grouping of looking-glasses, and would vanish if it were changed.

At first Campton was steeped in the mere sensual joy of his art; but
after a few days the play of the mirrors began to interest him. Mrs.
Talkett had abandoned her hospital work, and was trying, as she said, to
“recreate herself.” In this she was aided by a number of people who
struck Campton as rather too young not to have found some other job, or
too old to care any longer for that particular one. But all this did not
trouble his newly recovered serenity. He seemed to himself, somehow,
like a drowned body?but drowned in a toy aquarium?still staring about
with living eyes, but aware of the other people only as shapes swimming
by with a flash of exotic fins. They were enclosed together, all of
them, in an unreal luminous sphere, mercifully screened against the
reality from which a common impulse of horror had driven them; and since
he was among them it was not his business to wonder at the others. So,
through the cloud of his art, he looked out on them impartially.

The high priestess of the group was Mme. de Dolmetsch, with Harvey
Mayhew as her acolyte. Mr. Mayhew was still in pursuit of Atrocities: he
was in fact almost the only member of the group who did not rather
ostentatiously disavow the obligation to “carry on.” But he had
discovered that to discharge this sacred task he must vary it by
frequent intervals of relaxation. He explained to Campton that he had
found it to be “his duty to rest”; and he was indefatigable in the
performance of duty. He had therefore, with an expenditure of eloquence
which Campton thought surprisingly slight, persuaded Boylston to become
his understudy, and devote several hours a day to the whirling
activities of the shrimp-pink Bureau of Atrocities at the Nouveau Luxe.
Campton, at first, could not understand how the astute Boylston had
allowed himself to be drawn into the eddy; but it turned out that
Boylston’s astuteness had drawn him in. “You see, there’s an awful lot
of money to be got out of it, one way and another, and I know a use for
every penny?that is, Miss Anthony and I do,” the young man modestly
explained; adding, in response to the painter’s puzzled stare, that Mr.
Mayhew’s harrowing appeals were beginning to bring from America immense
sums for the Victims, and that Mr. Mayhew, while immensely gratified by
the effect of his eloquence, and the prestige it was bringing him in
French social and governmental circles, had not the cloudiest notion how
the funds should be used, and had begged Boylston to advise him. It was
owing to this that the ex-Delegate to the Hague was able, with a light
conscience, to seek the repose of Mrs. Talkett’s company and, with a
smile of the widest initiation, to listen to the subversive conversation
of her familiars.

“Subversive” was the motto of the group. Every one was engaged in
attacking some theory of art or life or letters which nobody in
particular defended. Even Mr. Talkett?a kindly young man with
eye-glasses and glossy hair, who roamed about straightening the
furniture, like a gentlemanly detective watching the presents at a
wedding?owned to Campton that _he_ was subversive; and on the painter’s
pressing for a definition, added: “Why, I don’t believe in anything
_she_ doesn’t believe in,” while his eye-glasses shyly followed his
wife’s course among the teacups.

Mme. de Dolmetsch, though obviously anxious to retain her hold on Mr.
Mayhew, did not restrict herself to such mild fare, but exercised her
matchless eyes on a troop of followers: the shock-haired pianist who
accompanied her recitations, a straight-backed young American
diplomatist whose collars seemed a part of his career, a lustrous South
American millionaire, and a short squat Sicilian who designed the
costumes for the pianist’s unproduced ballets.

All these people appeared to believe intensely in each other’s reality
and importance; but it gradually came over Campton that all of them,
excepting their host and hostess, knew that they were merely
masquerading.

To Campton, used to the hard-working world of art, this playing at
Bohemia seemed a nursery-game; but the scene acquired an unexpected
solidity from the appearance in it, one day, of the banker Jorgenstein,
who strolled in as naturally as if he had been dropping into Campton’s
studio to enquire into the progress of his own portrait.

“I must come and look you up, Campton?get you to finish me,” he said
jovially, tapping his fat boot with a malacca stick as he looked over
the painter’s head at the canvas on which Mrs. Talkett’s restless image
seemed to flutter like a butterfly impaled.

“You’ll owe it to _me_ if he does you,” the sitter declared, smiling
back at the leer which Campton divined behind his shoulder; and he felt
a sudden pity for her innocence.

“My wife made Campton come back to his real work?doing his bit, you
know,” said Mr. Talkett, straightening a curtain and disappearing again,
like a diving animal; and Mrs. Talkett turned her plaintive eyes on
Campton. “That kind of idiocy is all I’ve ever had,” they seemed to say;
and he nearly cried back to her: “But, you poor child, it’s the only
honest thing anywhere near you!”

Absorbed in his picture, he hardly stopped to wonder at Jorgenstein’s
reappearance, at his air of bloated satisfaction or his easy allusions
to Cabinet Ministers and eminent statesmen. The atmosphere of the
Talkett house was so mirage-like that even the big red bulk of the
international financier became imponderable in it.

But one day Campton, on his way home, ran across Dastrey, and remembered
that they had not met for weeks. The ministerial drudge looked worn and
preoccupied, and Campton was abruptly recalled to the world he had been
trying to escape from.

“You seem rather knocked-up?what’s wrong with you?”

Dastrey stared. “Wrong with me? Well?did you like the communique this
morning?”

“I didn’t read it,” said Campton curtly. They walked along a few steps
in silence.

“You see,” the painter continued, “I’ve gone back to my job?my painting.
I suddenly found I had to.”

Dastrey glanced at him with surprising kindliness. “Ah, that’s good
news, my dear fellow!”

“You think so?” Campton half-sneered.

“Of course?why not? What are you painting? May I come and see?”

“Naturally.” Campton paused. “The fact is, I was bitten the other day
with a desire to depict that little will-o’-the-wisp of a Mrs. Talkett.
Come to her house any afternoon and I’ll show you the thing.”

“To her house?” Dastrey paused with a frown. “Then the picture’s
finished?”

“No?not by a long way. I’m doing it there?in her _milieu_, among her
crowd. It amuses me; they amuse me. When will you come?” He shot out the
sentences like challenges; and his friend took them up in the same tone.

“To Mrs. Talkett’s?to meet her crowd? Thanks?I’m too much tied down by
my job.”

“No; you’re not. You’re too disapproving,” said Campton quarrelsomely.
“You think we’re all a lot of shirks, of drones, of international
loafers?I don’t know what you call us. But I’m one of them, so whatever
name you give them I must answer to. Well, I’ll tell you what they are,
my dear fellow?and I’m not ashamed to be among them: they’re people
who’ve resolutely, unanimously, unshakeably decided, for a certain
number of hours each day, to forget the war, to ignore it, to live as if
it were not and never had been, so that??”

“So that?”

“So that beauty shall not perish from the earth!” Campton shouted,
bringing his stick down with a whack on the pavement.

Dastrey broke into a laugh. “_Allons donc!_ Decided to forget the war?
Why, bless your heart, they’ve never, not one of ’em, ever been able to
remember it for an hour together; no, not from the first day, except as
it interfered with their plans or cut down their amusements or increased
their fortunes. You’re the only one of them, my dear chap, (since you
class yourself among them) of whom what you’ve just said is true; and if
you can forget the war while you’re at your work, so much the better for
you and for us and for posterity; and I hope you’ll paint all Mrs.
Talkett’s crowd, one after another. Though I doubt if they’re as good
subjects now as when you caught them last July with the war-funk on.” He
held out his hand with a dry smile. “Goodbye. I’m off to meet my nephew,
who’s here on leave.”

He hastened away, leaving Campton in a crumbled world. Louis Dastrey on
leave? But that was because he was at the front, the real front, in the
trenches, had already had a slight wound and a fine citation.
Staff-officers, as George had wisely felt, were not asking for leave
just yet....

The thoughts excited by this encounter left Campton more than ever
resolved to drug himself with work and frivolity. It was none of his
business to pry into the consciences of the people about him, not even
into Jorgenstein’s?into which one would presumably have had to be let
down in a diver’s suit, with oxygen pumping at top pressure. If the
government tolerated Jorgenstein’s presence in France, probably on the
ground that he could be useful?so the banker himself let it be known?it
was silly of people like Adele Anthony and Dastrey to wince at the mere
mention of his name. There woke in Campton all the old spirit of aimless
random defiance?revolt for revolt’s sake?which had marked the first
period of his life after his separation from his wife. He had long since
come to regard it as a crude and juvenile phase?yet here he was reliving
it.

Though he knew of the intimacy between Mrs. Talkett and the Brants he
had no fear of meeting Julia: it was impossible to picture her neat head
battling with the blasts of that dishevelled drawing-room. But though
she did not appear there, he heard her more and more often alluded to,
in terms of startling familiarity, by Mrs. Talkett’s visitors. It was
clear that they all saw her, chiefly in her own house, that they thought
her, according to their respective vocabularies, “a perfect dear,” “_une
femme exquise_” or “_une bonne vieille_” (ah, poor Julia!); and that
their sudden enthusiasm for her was not uninspired by the fact that she
had got her marvellous _chef_ demobilised, and was giving little
“war-dinners” followed by a quiet turn at bridge.

Campton remembered Mme. de Tranlay’s rebuke to Mrs. Brant on the day
when he had last called in the Avenue Marigny; then he remembered also
that it was on that very day that he had returned to his painting.

“After all, she held out longer than I did?poor Julia!” he mused,
annoyed at the idea of her being the complacent victim of all the
voracities he saw about him, and yet reflecting that she was at last
living her life, as they called it at Mrs. Talkett’s. After all, the
fact that George was not at the front seemed to exonerate his
parents?unless, indeed, it did just the opposite.

One day, coming earlier than usual to Mrs. Talkett’s to put in a last
afternoon’s work on her portrait, Campton, to his surprise, found his
wife in front of it. Equally to his surprise he noticed that she was
dressed with a juvenility quite new to her; and for the first time he
thought she looked old-fashioned and also old. She met him with her
usual embarrassment.

“I didn’t know you came as early as this. Madge told me I might just run
in??” She waved her hand toward the portrait.

“I hope you like it,” he said, suddenly finding that he didn’t.

“It’s marvellous?marvellous.” She looked at him timidly. “It’s
extraordinary, how you’ve caught her rhythm, her _tempo_,” she ventured
in the jargon of the place. Campton, to hide a smile, turned away to get
his brushes. “I’m so glad,” she continued hastily, “that you’ve begun to
paint again. We all need to ... to....”

“Oh, not you and I, do we?” he rejoined with a scornful laugh.

She evidently caught the allusion, for she blushed all over her
uncovered neck, up through the faintly wrinkled cheeks to the roots of
her newly dyed hair; then he saw her eyes fill.

“What’s she crying for? Because George is _not_ in danger?” he wondered,
busying himself with his palette.

Mrs. Talkett hurried in with surprise and apologies; and one by one the
habitues followed, with cheery greetings for Mrs. Brant and a moment of
constraint as they noted Campton’s presence, and the relation between
the two was mutely passed about. Then the bridge-tables were brought,
Mr. Talkett began to straighten the cards nervously, and the guests
broke up into groups, forgetting everything but their own affairs. As
Campton turned back to his work he was aware of a last surprise in the
sight of Mrs. Brant serene and almost sparkling, waving her adieux to
the bridge-tables, and going out followed by Jorgenstein, with whom she
seemed on terms of playful friendliness. Of all strange war
promiscuities, Campton thought this the strangest.




                                  XXI


The next time Campton saw Mrs. Brant was in his own studio.

He was preparing, one morning, to leave the melancholy place, when the
bell rang and his _bonne_ let her in. Her dress was less frivolous than
at Mrs. Talkett’s, and she wore a densely patterned veil, like the
ladies in cinema plays when they visit their seducers or their
accomplices.

Through the veil she looked at him agitatedly, and said: “George is not
at Sainte Menehould.”

He stared.

“No. Anderson was there the day before yesterday.”

“Brant? At Sainte Menehould?” Campton felt the blood rush to his
temples. What! He, the boy’s father, had not so much as dared to ask for
the almost unattainable permission to go into the war-zone; and this
other man, who was nothing to George, absolutely nothing, who had no
right whatever to ask for leave to visit him, had somehow obtained the
priceless favour, and instead of passing it on, instead of offering at
least to share it with the boy’s father, had sneaked off secretly to
feast on the other’s lawful privilege!

“How the devil???” Campton burst out.

“Oh, he got a Red Cross mission; it was arranged very suddenly?through a
friend....”

“Yes?well?” Campton stammered, sitting down lest his legs should fail
him, and signing to her to take a chair.

“Well?he was not there!” she repeated excitedly. “It’s what we might
have known?since he’s changed his address.”

“Then he didn’t see him?” Campton interrupted, the ferocious joy of the
discovery crowding out his wrath and wonder.

“Anderson didn’t? No. He wasn’t there, I tell you!”

“The H.Q. has been moved?”

“No, it hasn’t. Anderson saw one of the officers. He said George had
been sent on a mission.”

“To another H.Q.?”

“That’s what they said. I don’t believe it.”

“What do you believe?”

“I don’t know. Anderson’s sure they told him the truth. The officer he
saw is a friend of George’s, and he said George was expected back that
very evening.”

Campton sat looking at her uncertainly. Did she dread, or did she rather
wish, to disbelieve the officer’s statement? Where did she hope or fear
that George had gone? And what were Campton’s own emotions? As confused,
no doubt, as hers?as undefinable. The insecurity of his feelings moved
him to a momentary compassion for hers, which were surely pitiable,
whatever else they were. Then a savage impulse swept away every other,
and he said: “Wherever George was, Brant’s visit will have done him no
good.”

She grew pale. “What do you mean?”

“I wonder it never occurred to you?or to your husband, since he’s so
solicitous,” Campton went on, prolonging her distress.

“Please tell me what you mean,” she pleaded with frightened eyes.

“Why, in God’s name, couldn’t you both let well enough alone? Didn’t you
guess why George never asked for leave?why I’ve always advised him not
to? Don’t you know that nothing is as likely to get a young fellow into
trouble as having his family force their way through to see him, use
influence, seem to ask favours? I dare say that’s how that fool of a
Dolmetsch woman got Isador killed. No one would have noticed where he
was if she hadn’t gone on so about him. They _had_ to send him to the
front finally. And now the chances are??”

“Oh, no, no, no?don’t say it!” She held her hands before her face as if
he had flung something flaming at her. “It was I who made Anderson go!”

“Well?Brant ought to have thought of that?_I_ did,” he pursued
sardonically.

Her answer disarmed him. “You’re his father.”

“I don’t mean,” he went on hastily, “that Brant’s not right: of course
there’s nothing to be afraid of. I can’t imagine why you thought there
was.”

She hung her head. “Sometimes when I hear the other women?other
mothers?I feel as if our turn must come too. Even at Sainte Menehould a
shell might hit the house. Anderson said the artillery fire seemed so
near.”

He made no answer, and she sat silent, without apparent thought of
leaving. Finally he said: “I was just going out??”

She stood up. “Oh, yes?that reminds me. I came to ask you to come with
me.”

“With you???”

“The motor’s waiting?you must.” She laid her hand on his arm. “To see
Olida, the new _clairvoyante_. Everybody goes to her?everybody who’s
anxious about anyone. Even the scientific people believe in her. She’s
told people the most extraordinary things?it seems she warned Daisy de
Dolmetsch.... Well, I’d _rather_ know!” she burst out passionately.

Campton smiled. “She’ll tell you that George is back at his desk.”

“Well, then?isn’t that worth it? Please don’t refuse me!”

He disengaged himself gently. “My poor Julia, go by all means if it will
reassure you.”

“Ah, but you’ve got to come too. You can’t say no: Madge Talkett tells
me that if _the two nearest_ go together Olida sees so much more
clearly?especially a father and mother,” she added hastily, as if
conscious of the inopportune “nearest.” After a moment she went on:
“Even Mme. de Tranlay’s been; Daisy de Dolmetsch met her on the stairs.
Olida told her that her youngest boy, from whom she’d had no news for
weeks, was all right, and coming home on leave. Mme. de Tranlay didn’t
know Daisy, except by sight, but she stopped her to tell her. Only
fancy?the last person she would have spoken to in ordinary times! But
she was so excited and happy! And two days afterward the boy turned up
safe and sound. You must come!” she insisted.

Campton was seized with a sudden deep compassion for all these women
groping for a ray of light in the blackness. It moved him to think of
Mme. de Tranlay’s proud figure climbing a _clairvoyante’s_ stairs.

“I’ll come if you want me to,” he said.

They drove to the Batignolles quarter. Mrs. Brant’s lips were twitching
under her veil, and as the motor stopped she said childishly: “I’ve
never been to this kind of place before.”

“I should hope not,” Campton rejoined. He himself, during the Russian
lady’s rule, had served an apprenticeship among the soothsayers, and
come away disgusted with the hours wasted in their company. He suddenly
remembered the Spanish girl in the little white house near the railway,
who had told his fortune in the hot afternoons with cards and
olive-stones, and had found, by irrefutable signs, that he and she would
“come together” again. “Well, it was better than this pseudo-scientific
humbug,” he mused, “because it was picturesque?and so was she?and she
believed in it.”

Mrs. Brant rang, and Campton followed her into a narrow hall. A
servant-woman showed them into a _salon_ which was as commonplace as a
doctor’s waiting-room. On the mantelpiece were vases of Pampas grass,
and a stuffed monkey swung from the electrolier. Evidently Mme. Olida
was superior to the class of fortune-tellers who prepare a special
stage-setting, and no astrologer’s robe or witch’s kitchen was to be
feared.

The maid led them across a plain dining-room into an inner room. The
shutters were partly closed, and the blinds down. A voluminous woman in
loose black rose from a sofa. Gold earrings gleamed under her oiled
black hair?and suddenly, through the billows of flesh, and behind the
large pale mask, Campton recognized the Spanish girl who used to read
his fortune in the house by the railway. Her eyes rested a moment on
Mrs. Brant; then they met his with the same heavy stare. But he noticed
that her hands, which were small and fat, trembled a little as she
pointed to two chairs.

“Sit down, please,” she said in a low rough voice, speaking in French.
The door opened again, and a young man with Levantine eyes and a showy
necktie looked in. She said sharply: “No,” and he disappeared. Campton
noticed that a large emerald flashed on his manicured hand. Mme. Olida
continued to look at her visitors.

Mrs. Brant wiped her dry lips and stammered: “We’re his parents?a son at
the front....”

Mme. Olida fell back in a trance-like attitude, let her lips droop over
her magnificent eyes, and rested her head against a soiled sofa-pillow.
Presently she held out both hands.

“You are his parents? Yes? Give me each a hand, please.” As her
cushioned palm touched Campton’s he thought he felt a tremor of
recognition, and saw, in the half-light, the tremor communicate itself
to her lids. He grasped her hand firmly, and she lifted her eyes, looked
straight into his with her heavy velvety stare, and said: “You should
hold my hand more loosely; the currents must not be compressed.” She
turned her palm upward, so that his finger-tips rested on it as if on a
keyboard; he noticed that she did not do the same with the hand she had
placed in Mrs. Brant’s.

Suddenly he remembered that one sultry noon, lying under the olives, she
had taught him, by signals tapped on his own knee, how to say what he
chose to her without her brothers’ knowing it. He looked at the huge
woman, seeking the curve of the bowed upper lip on which what used to be
a faint blue shadow had now become a line as thick as her eyebrows, and
recalling how her laugh used to lift the lip above her little round
teeth while she threw back her head, showing the Agnus Dei in her neck.
Now her mouth was like a withered flower, and in a crease of her neck a
string of pearls was embedded.

“Take hands, please,” she commanded. Julia gave Campton her ungloved
hand, and he sat between the two women.

“You are the parents? You want news of your son?ah, like so many!” Mme.
Olida closed her eyes again.

“To know where he is?whereabouts?that is what we want,” Mrs. Brant
whispered.

Mme. Olida sat as if labouring with difficult visions. The noises of the
street came faintly through the closed windows and a smell of garlic and
cheap scent oppressed Campton’s lungs and awakened old associations.
With a final effort of memory he fixed his eyes on the _clairvoyante’s_
darkened mask, and tapped her palm once or twice. She neither stirred
nor looked at him.

“I see?I see??” she began in the consecrated phrase. “A veil?a thick
veil of smoke between me and a face which is young and fair, with a
short nose and reddish hair: thick, thick, thick hair, exactly like this
gentleman’s when he was young....”

Mrs. Brant’s hand trembled in Campton’s. “It’s true,” she whispered,
“before your hair turned grey it used to be as red as Georgie’s.”

“The veil grows denser?there are awful noises; there’s a face with
blood?but not that first face. This is a very young man, as innocent as
when he was born, with blue eyes like flax-flowers, but blood, blood ...
why do I see that face? Ah, now it is on a hospital pillow?not your
son’s face, the other; there is no one near, no one but some German
soldiers laughing and drinking; the lips move, the hands are stretched
out in agony; but no one notices. It is a face that has something to say
to the gentleman; not to you, Madame. The uniform is different?is it an
English uniform?... Ah, now the face turns grey; the eyes shut, there is
foam on the lips. Now it is gone?there’s another man’s head on the
pillow.... Now, now your son’s face comes back; but not near those
others. The smoke has cleared ... I see a desk and papers; your son is
writing....”

“Oh,” gasped Mrs. Brant.

“If you squeeze my hands you arrest the current,” Mme. Olida reminded
her. There was another interval; Campton felt his wife’s fingers beating
between his like trapped birds. The heat and darkness oppressed him;
beads of sweat came out on his forehead. Did the woman really see
things, and was that face with the blood on it Benny Upsher’s?

Mme. Olida droned on. “It is your son who is writing?the young man with
the very thick hair. He is writing to you?trying to explain something.
Perhaps you have hoped to see him lately? That is it; he is telling you
why it could not be. He is sitting quietly in a room. There is no
smoke.” She released Mrs. Brant’s hand and Campton’s. “Go home, Madame.
You are fortunate. Perhaps his letter will reach you to-morrow.”

Mrs. Brant stood up sobbing. She found her gold bag and pushed it toward
Campton. He had been feeling in his own pocket for money; but as he drew
it forth Mme. Olida put back his hand. “No. I am superstitious; it’s so
seldom that I can give good news. _Bonjour, madame, bonjour, monsieur._
I commend your son to the blessed Virgin and to all the saints and
angels.”

Campton put Julia into the motor. She was still crying, but her tears
were radiant. “Isn’t she wonderful? Didn’t you see how she seemed to
_recognize_ George? There’s no mistaking his hair! How could she have
known what it was like? Don’t think me foolish?I feel so comforted!”

“Of course; you’ll hear from him to-morrow,” Campton said. He was
touched by her maternal passion, and ashamed of having allowed her so
small a share in his jealous worship of his son. He walked away,
thinking of the young man dying in a German hospital, and of the other
man’s face succeeding his on the pillow.




                                  XXII


Two days later, to Campton’s surprise, Anderson Brant appeared in the
morning at the studio.

Campton, finishing a late breakfast in careless studio-garb, saw his
visitor peer cautiously about, as though fearing undressed models behind
the screens or empty beer-bottles under the tables. It was the first
time that Mr. Brant had entered the studio since his attempt to buy
George’s portrait, and Campton guessed at once that he had come again
about George.

He looked at the painter shyly, as if oppressed by the indiscretion of
intruding at that hour.

“It was my?Mrs. Brant who insisted?when she got this letter,” he brought
out between precautionary coughs.

Campton looked at him tolerantly: a barrier seemed to have fallen
between them since their brief exchange of words about Benny Upsher. The
letter, as Campton had expected, was a line from George to his mother,
written two days after Mr. Brant’s visit to Sainte Menehould. It
expressed, in George’s usual staccato style, his regret at having been
away. “Hard luck, when one is riveted to the same square yard of earth
for weeks on end, to have just happened to be somewhere else the day
Uncle Andy broke through.” It was always the same tone of fluent banter,
in which Campton fancied he detected a lurking stridency, like the
scrape of an overworked gramophone containing only comic disks.

“Ah, well?his mother must be satisfied,” Campton said as he gave the
letter back.

“Oh, completely. So much so that I’ve induced her to go off for a while
to Biarritz. The doctor finds her overdone; she’d got it into her head
that George had been sent to the front; I couldn’t convince her to the
contrary.”

Campton looked at him. “You yourself never believed it?”

Mr. Brant, who had half risen, as though feeling that his errand was
done, slid back into his seat and clasped his small hands on his
agate-headed stick.

“Oh, never.”

“It was not,” Campton pursued, “with that idea that you went to Sainte
Menehould?”

Mr. Brant glanced at him in surprise. “No. On the contrary??”

“On the contrary?”

“I understood from?from his mother that, in the circumstances, you were
opposed to his asking for leave; thought it unadvisable, that is. So, as
it was such a long time since we’d seen him??” The “we,” pulling him up
short, spread a brick-red blush over his baldness.

“Not longer than since I have?but then I’ve not your opportunities,”
Campton retorted, the sneer breaking out in spite of him. Though he had
grown kindly disposed toward Mr. Brant when they were apart, the old
resentments still broke out in his presence.

Mr. Brant clasped and unclasped the knob of his stick. “I took the first
chance that offered; I had his mother to think of.” Campton made no
answer, and he continued: “I was sorry to hear you thought I’d perhaps
been imprudent.”

“There’s no perhaps about it,” Campton retorted. “Since you say you were
not anxious about the boy I can’t imagine why you made the attempt.”

Mr. Brant was silent. He seemed overwhelmed by the other’s
disapprobation, and unable to find any argument in his own defence. “I
never dreamed it could cause any trouble,” he said at length.

“That’s the ground you’ve always taken in your interference with my
son!” Campton had risen, pushing back his chair, and Mr. Brant stood up
also. They faced each other without speaking.

“I’m sorry,” Mr. Brant began, “that you should take such a view. It
seemed to me natural ..., when Mr. Jorgenstein gave me the chance??”

“Jorgenstein! It was Jorgenstein who took you to the front? Took you to
see my son?” Campton threw his head back and laughed. “That’s
complete?that’s really complete!”

Mr. Brant reddened as if the laugh had been a blow. He stood very erect,
his lips as tightly closed as a shut penknife. He had the attitude of a
civilian under fire, considerably perturbed, but obliged to set the
example of fortitude.

Campton looked at him. At last he had Mr. Brant at a disadvantage. Their
respective situations were reversed, and he saw that the banker was
aware of it, and oppressed by the fear that he might have done harm to
George. He evidently wanted to say all this and did not know how.

His distress moved Campton, in whose ears the sound of his own outburst
still echoed unpleasantly. If only Mr. Brant would have kept out of his
way he would have found it so easy to be fair to him!

“I’m sorry,” he began in a quieter tone. “I dare say I’m unjust?perhaps
it’s in the nature of our relation. Can’t you understand how I’ve felt,
looking on helplessly all these years, while you’ve done for the boy
everything I wanted to do for him myself? Haven’t you guessed why I
jumped at my first success, and nursed my celebrity till I’d got half
the fools in Europe lining up to be painted?” His excitement was
mastering him again, and he went on hurriedly: “Do you suppose I’d have
wasted all these precious years over their stupid faces if I hadn’t
wanted to make my son independent of you? And he _would_ have been, if
the war hadn’t come; been my own son again and nobody else’s, leading
his own life, whatever he chose it to be, instead of having to waste his
youth in your bank, learning how to multiply your millions.”

The futility of this retrospect, and the inconsistency of his whole
attitude, exasperated Campton more than anything his visitor could do or
say, and he stopped, embarrassed by the sound of his own words, yet
seeing no escape save to bury them under more and more. But Mr. Brant
had opened his lips.

“They’ll be _his_, you know: the millions,” he said.

Campton’s anger dropped: he felt Mr. Brant at last too completely at his
mercy. He waited for a moment before speaking.

“You tried to buy his portrait once?you remember I told you it was not
for sale,” he then said.

Mr. Brant stood motionless, grasping his stick in one hand and stroking
his moustache with the other. For a while he seemed to be considering
Campton’s words without feeling their sting. “It was not the money ...”
he stammered out at length, from the depth of some unutterable plea for
understanding; then he added: “I wish you a good morning,” and walked
out with his little stiff steps.




                                 XXIII


Campton was thoroughly ashamed of what he had said to Mr. Brant, or
rather of his manner of saying it. If he could have put the same facts
quietly, ironically, without forfeiting his dignity, and with the added
emphasis which deliberateness and composure give, he would scarcely have
regretted the opportunity. He had always secretly accused himself of a
lack of courage in accepting Mr. Brant’s heavy benefactions for George
when the boy was too young to know what they might pledge him to; and it
had been a disappointment that George, on reaching the age of
discrimination, had not appeared to find the burden heavy, or the
obligations unpleasant.

Campton, having accepted Mr. Brant’s help, could hardly reproach his son
for feeling grateful for it, and had therefore thought it “more decent”
to postpone disparagement of their common benefactor till his own
efforts had set them both free. Even then, it would be impossible to pay
off the past?but the past might have been left to bury itself. Now his
own wrath had dug it up, and he had paid for the brief joy of casting
its bones in Mr. Brant’s face by a deep disgust at his own weakness.

All these things would have weighed on him even more if the outer weight
of events had not been so much heavier. He had not returned to Mrs.
Talkett’s since the banker’s visit; he did not wish to meet Jorgenstein,
and his talk with the banker, and his visit to the _clairvoyante_, had
somehow combined to send that whole factitious world tumbling about his
ears. It was absurd to attach any importance to poor Olida’s
vaticinations; but the vividness of her description of the baby-faced
boy dying in a German hospital haunted Campton’s nights. If it were not
the portrait of Benny Upsher it was at least that of hundreds and
thousands of lads like him, who were thus groping and agonizing and
stretching out vain hands, while in Mrs. Talkett’s drawing-room well-fed
men and expensive women heroically “forgot the war.” Campton, seeking to
expiate his own brief forgetfulness by a passion of renewed activity,
announced to Boylston the next afternoon that he was coming back to the
office.

Boylston hardly responded: he looked up from his desk with a face so
strange that Campton broke off to cry out: “What’s happened?”

The young man held out a newspaper. “They’ve done it?they’ve done it!”
he shouted. Across the page the name of the _Lusitania_ blazed out like
the writing on the wall.

The Berserker light on Boylston’s placid features transformed him into
an avenging cherub. “Ah, now we’re in it?we’re in it at last!” he
exulted, as if the horror of the catastrophe were already swallowed up
in its result. The two looked at each other without further words; but
the older man’s first thought had been for his son. Now, indeed, America
was “in it”: the gross tangible proof for which her government had
forced her to wait was there in all its unimagined horror. Cant and
cowardice in high places had drugged and stupefied her into the strange
belief that she was too proud to fight for others; and here she was
brutally forced to fight for herself. Campton waited with a straining
heart for his son’s first comment on the new fact that they were “in
it.”

But his excitement and Boylston’s exultation were short-lived. Before
many days it became apparent that the proud nation which had flamed up
overnight at the unproved outrage of the _Maine_ was lying supine under
the flagrant provocation of the _Lusitania_. The days which followed
were, to many Americans, the bitterest of the war: to Campton they
seemed the ironic justification of the phase of indifference and
self-absorption through which he had just passed. He could not go back
to Mrs. Talkett and her group; but neither could he take up his work
with even his former zeal. The bitter taste of the national humiliation
was perpetually on his lips: he went about like a man dishonoured.

He wondered, as the days and the weeks passed, at having no word from
George. Had he refrained from writing because he too felt the national
humiliation too deeply either to speak of it or to leave it unmentioned?
Or was he so sunk in security that he felt only a mean thankfulness that
nothing was changed? From such thoughts Campton’s soul recoiled; but
they lay close under the surface of his tenderness, and reared their
evil heads whenever they caught him alone.

As the summer dragged itself out he was more and more alone. Dastrey,
cured of his rheumatism, had left the Ministry to resume his ambulance
work. Miss Anthony was submerged under the ever-mounting tide of
refugees. Mrs. Brant had taken a small house at Deauville (on the
pretext of being near her hospital), and Campton heard of the Talketts’
being with her, and others of their set. Mr. Mayhew appeared at the
studio one day, in tennis flannels and a new straw hat, announcing that
he “needed rest,” and rather sheepishly adding that Mrs. Brant had
suggested his spending “a quiet fortnight” with her. “I’ve _got_ to do
it, if I’m to see this thing through,” Mr. Mayhew added in a stern
voice, as if commanding himself not to waver.

A few days later, glancing over the _Herald_, Campton read that Mme. de
Dolmetsch, “the celebrated _artiste_,” was staying with Mr. and Mrs.
Anderson Brant at Deauville, where she had gone to give recitations for
the wounded in hospital. Campton smiled, and then thought with a
tightening heart of Benny Upsher and Ladislas Isador, so incredibly
unlike in their lives, so strangely one in their death. Finally, not
long afterward, he read that the celebrated financier, Sir Cyril
Jorgenstein (recently knighted by the British Government) had bestowed a
gift of a hundred thousand francs upon Mrs. Brant’s hospital. It was
rumoured, the paragraph ended, that Sir Cyril would soon receive the
Legion of Honour for his magnificent liberalities to France.

And still the flood of war rolled on. Success here, failure there, the
menace of disaster elsewhere?Russia retreating to the San, Italy
declaring war on Austria and preparing to cross the Isonzo, the British
advance at Anzac, and from the near East news of the new landing at
Suvla. Through all this alternating of tragedy and triumph ran the
million and million individual threads of hope, fear, fortitude,
resolve, with which the fortune of the war was obscurely but fatally
interwoven. Campton remembered his sneer at Dastrey’s phrase: “One can
at least contribute an attitude.” He had begun to feel the force of
that, to understand the need of every human being’s “pulling his weight”
in the struggle, had begun to scan every face in the street in the
passionate effort to distinguish between the stones in the wall of
resistance and the cracks through which discouragement might filter.

The shabby office of the Palais Royal again became his only haven. His
portrait of Mrs. Talkett had brought him many new orders; but he refused
them all, and declined even to finish the pictures interrupted by the
war. One of his abrupt revulsions of feeling had flung him back, heart
and brain, into the horror he had tried to escape from. “If thou ascend
up into heaven I am there; if thou make thy bed in hell, behold I am
there,” the war said to him; and as the daily head-lines shrieked out
the names of new battle-fields, from the Arctic shore to the Pacific, he
groaned back like the Psalmist: “Whither shall I go from thee?”

The people about him?Miss Anthony, Boylston, Mlle. Davril, and all their
band of tired resolute workers?plodded ahead, their eyes on their task,
seeming to find in its fulfillment a partial escape from the intolerable
oppression. The women especially, with their gift of living in the
particular, appeared hardly aware of the appalling development of the
catastrophe; and Campton felt himself almost as lonely among these
people who thought of nothing but the war as among those who hardly
thought of it at all. It was only when he and Boylston, after a hard
morning’s work, went out to lunch together, that what he called the
_Lusitania look_, suddenly darkening the younger man’s face, moved the
painter with an anguish like his own.

Boylston, breaking through his habitual shyness, had one day
remonstrated with Campton for not going on with his painting: but the
latter had merely rejoined: “We’ve each of us got to worry through this
thing in our own way?” and the subject was not again raised between
them.

The intervals between George’s letters were growing longer. Campton, who
noted in his pocket-diary the dates of all that he received, as well as
those addressed to Mrs. Brant and Miss Anthony, had not had one to
record since the middle of June. And in that there was no allusion to
the _Lusitania_.

“It’s queer,” he said to Boylston, one day toward the end of July; “I
don’t know yet what George thinks about the _Lusitania_.”

“Oh, yes, you do, sir!” Boylston returned, laughing; “but all the mails
from the war-zone,” he added, “have been very much delayed lately. When
there’s a big attack on anywhere they hold up everything along the line.
And besides, no end of letters are lost.”

“I suppose so,” said Campton, pocketing the diary, and trying for the
millionth time to call up a vision of his boy, seated at a desk in some
still unvisualized place, his rumpled fair head bent above columns of
figures or files of correspondence, while day after day the roof above
him shook with the roar of the attacks which held up his letters.




                                BOOK III




                                  XXIV


The gates of Paris were behind them, and they were rushing through an
icy twilight between long lines of houses, factory chimneys and
city-girt fields, when Campton at last roused himself and understood.

It was he, John Campton, who sat in that car?that noiseless
swiftly-sliding car, so cushioned and commodious, so ingeniously fitted
for all the exigencies and emergencies of travel, that it might have
been a section of the Nouveau Luxe on wheels; and the figure next to
him, on the extreme other side of the deeply upholstered seat, was that
of Anderson Brant. This, for the moment, was as far as Campton’s dazed
perceptions carried him....

The motor was among real fields and orchards, and the icy half-light
which might just as well have been dusk was turning definitely to dawn,
when at last, disentangling his mind from a tight coil of passport and
permit problems, he thought: “But this is the road north of Paris?that
must have been St. Denis.”

Among all the multiplied strangenesses of the last strange hours it had
hardly struck him before that, now he was finally on his way to George,
it was not to the Argonne that he was going, but in the opposite
direction. The discovery held his floating mind for a moment, but for a
moment only, before it drifted away again, to be caught on some other
projecting strangeness.

Chief among these was Mr. Brant’s presence at his side, and the fact
that the motor they were sitting in was Mr. Brant’s. But Campton felt
that such enormities were not to be dealt with yet. He had neither slept
nor eaten since the morning before, and whenever he tried to grasp the
situation in its entirety his spirit fainted away again into outer
darkness....

His companion presently coughed, and said, in a voice even more than
usually colourless and expressionless: “We are at Luzarches already.”

It was the first time, Campton was sure, that Mr. Brant had spoken since
they had got into the car together, hours earlier as it seemed to him,
in the dark street before the studio in Montmartre; the first, at least,
except to ask, as the chauffeur touched the self-starter: “Will you have
the rug over you?”

The two travellers did not share a rug: a separate one, soft as fur and
light as down, lay neatly folded on the grey carpet before each seat;
but Campton, though the early air was biting, had left his where it lay,
and had not answered.

Now he was beginning to feel that he could not decently remain silent
any longer; and with an effort which seemed as mechanical and external
as the movements of the chauffeur whose back he viewed through the wide
single sheet of plate-glass, he brought out, like a far-off echo:
“Luzarches...?”

It was not that there lingered in him any of his old sense of antipathy
toward Mr. Brant. In the new world into which he had been abruptly
hurled, the previous morning, by the coming of that letter which looked
so exactly like any other letter?in this new world Mr. Brant was nothing
more than the possessor of the motor and of the “pull” that were to get
him, Campton, in the shortest possible time, to the spot of earth where
his son lay dying. Once assured of this, Campton had promptly and
indifferently acquiesced in Miss Anthony’s hurried suggestion that it
would be only decent to let Mr. Brant go to Doullens with him.

But the exchange of speech with any one, whether Mr. Brant or another,
was for the time being manifestly impossible. The effort, to Campton, to
rise out of his grief, was like that of a dying person struggling back
from regions too remote for his voice to reach the ears of the living.
He shrank into his corner, and tried once more to fix his attention on
the flying landscape.

All that he saw in it, speeding ahead of him even faster than their own
flight, was the ghostly vision of another motor, carrying a figure bowed
like his, mute like his: the figure of Fortin-Lescluze, as he had seen
it plunge away into the winter darkness after the physician’s son had
been killed. Campton remembered asking himself then, as he had asked
himself so often since: “How should I bear it if it happened to me?”

He knew the answer to that now, as he knew everything else a man could
know: so it had seemed to his astonished soul since the truth had
flashed at him out of that fatal letter. Ever since then he had been
turning about and about in a vast glare of initiation: of all the old
crowded misty world which the letter had emptied at a stroke, nothing
remained but a few memories of George’s boyhood, like a closet of toys
in a house knocked down by an earthquake.

The vision of Fortin-Lescluze’s motor vanished, and in its place Campton
suddenly saw Boylston’s screwed-up eyes staring out at him under furrows
of anguish. Campton remembered, the evening before, pushing the letter
over to him across the office table, and stammering: “Read it?read it to
me. I can’t??” and Boylston’s sudden sobbing explosion: “But I _knew_,
sir?I’ve known all along ...” and then the endless pause before Campton
gathered himself up to falter out (like a child deciphering the words in
a primer): “You _knew_?knew that George was wounded?”

“No, no, not that; but that he might be?oh, at any minute! Forgive
me?oh, do forgive me! He wouldn’t let me tell you that he was at the
front,” Boylston had faltered through his sobs.

“Let you tell me???”

“You and his mother: he refused a citation last March so that you
shouldn’t find out that he’d exchanged into an infantry regiment. He was
determined to from the first. He’s been fighting for months; he’s been
magnificent; he got away from the Argonne last February; but you were
none of you to know.”

“But why?why?why?” Campton had flashed out; then his heart stood still,
and he awaited the answer with lowered head.

“Well, you see, he was afraid: afraid you might prevent ... use your
influence ... you and Mrs. Brant....”

Campton looked up again, challenging the other. “He imagined perhaps
that we _had_?in the beginning?”

“Oh, yes”?Boylston was perfectly calm about it?“he knew all about that.
And he made us swear not to speak; Miss Anthony and me. Miss Anthony
knew.... If this thing happened,” Boylston ended in a stricken voice,
“you were not to be unfair to her, he said.”

Over and over again that short dialogue distilled itself syllable by
syllable, pang by pang, into Campton’s cowering soul. He had had to
learn all this, this overwhelming unbelievable truth about his son; and
at the same instant to learn that that son was grievously wounded,
perhaps dying (what else, in such circumstances, did the giving of the
Legion of Honour ever mean?); and to deal with it all in the wild
minutes of preparation for departure, of intercession with the
authorities, sittings at the photographer’s, and a crisscross of
confused telephone-calls from the Embassy, the Prefecture and the War
Office.

From this welter of images Miss Anthony’s face next detached itself:
white and withered, yet with a look which triumphed over its own ruin,
and over Campton’s wrath.

“Ah?you knew too, did you? You were his other confidant? How you all
kept it up?how you all lied to us!” Campton had burst out at her.

She took it firmly. “I showed you his letters.”

“Yes: the letters he wrote to you to be shown.”

She received this in silence, and he followed it up. “It was you who
drove him to the front?it was you who sent my son to his death!”

Without flinching, she gazed back at him. “Oh, John?it was you!”

“I?I? What do you mean? I never as much as lifted a finger??”

“No?” She gave him a wan smile. “Then it must have been the old man who
invented the Mangle!” she cried, and cast herself on Campton’s breast.
He held her there for a long moment, stroking her lank hair, and saying
“Adele?Adele,” because in that rush of understanding he could not think
of anything else to say. At length he stooped and laid on her lips the
strangest kiss he had ever given or taken; and it was then that, drawing
back, she exclaimed: “That’s for George, when you get to him. Remember!”

The image of George’s mother rose last on the whirling ground of
Campton’s thoughts: an uncertain image, blurred by distance, indistinct
as some wraith of Mme. Olida’s evoking.

Mrs. Brant was still at Biarritz; there had been no possibility of her
getting back in time to share the journey to the front. Even Mr. Brant’s
power in high places must have fallen short of such an attempt; and it
was not made. Boylston, despatched in haste to bear the news of George’s
wounding to the banker, had reported that the utmost Mr. Brant could do
was to write at once to his wife, and arrange for her return to Paris,
since telegrams to the frontier departments travelled more slowly than
letters, and in nine cases out of ten were delayed indefinitely. Campton
had asked no more at the time; but in the last moment before leaving
Paris he remembered having said to Adele Anthony: “You’ll be there when
Julia comes?” and Miss Anthony had nodded back: “At the station.”

The word, it appeared, roused the same memory in both of them; meeting
her eyes, he saw there the Gare de l’Est in the summer morning, the
noisily manœuvring trains jammed with bright young heads, the flowers,
the waving handkerchiefs, and everybody on the platform smiling fixedly
till some particular carriage-window slid out of sight. The scene, at
the time, had been a vast blur to Campton: would he ever again, he
wondered, see anything as clearly as he saw it now, in all its
unmerciful distinctness? He heard the sobs of the girl who had said such
a blithe goodbye to the young _Chasseur Alpin_, he saw her going away,
led by her elderly companion, and powdering her nose at the _laiterie_
over the cup of coffee she could not swallow. And this was what her sobs
had meant....

“This place,” said Mr. Brant, with his usual preliminary cough, “must
be??” He bent over a motor-map, trying to decipher the name; but after
fumbling for his eye-glasses, and rubbing them with a beautifully
monogrammed cambric handkerchief, he folded the map up again and slipped
it into one of the many pockets which honeycombed the interior of the
car. Campton recalled the deathlike neatness of the banker’s private
office on the day when the one spot of disorder in it had been the torn
telegram announcing Benny Upsher’s disappearance.

The motor lowered its speed to make way for a long train of army
lorries. Close upon them clattered a file of gun-wagons, with unshaven
soldiers bestriding the gaunt horses. Torpedo-cars carrying officers
slipped cleverly in and out of the tangle, and motor-cycles, incessantly
rushing by, peppered the air with their explosions.

“This is the sort of thing he’s been living in?living in for months and
months,” Campton mused.

He himself had seen something of the same kind when he had gone to
Chalons in the early days to appeal to Fortin-Lescluze; but at that time
the dread significance of the machinery of war had passed almost
unnoticed in his preoccupation about his boy. Now he realized that for a
year that machinery had been the setting of his boy’s life; for months
past such sights and sounds as these had formed the whole of George’s
world; and Campton’s eyes took in every detail with an agonized avidity.

“What’s that?” he exclaimed.

A huge continuous roar, seeming to fall from the low clouds above them,
silenced the puny rumble and clatter of the road. On and on it went, in
a slow pulsating rhythm, like the boom of waves driven by a gale on some
far-distant coast.

“That? The guns??” said Mr. Brant.

“At the front?”

“Oh, sometimes they seem much nearer. Depends on the wind.”

Campton sat bewildered. Had he ever before heard that sinister roar? At
Chalons? He could not be sure. But the sound had assuredly not been the
same; now it overwhelmed him like the crash of the sea over a drowning
head. He cowered back in his corner. Would it ever stop, he asked
himself? Or was it always like this, day and night, in the hell of hells
that they were bound for? Was that merciless thud forever in the ears of
the dying?

A sentinel stopped the motor and asked for their pass. He turned it
about and about, holding it upside-down in his horny hands, and
wrinkling his brows in the effort to decipher the inverted characters.

“How can I tell???” he grumbled doubtfully, looking from the faces of
the two travellers to their unrecognizable photographs.

Mr. Brant was already feeling for his pocket, and furtively extracting a
bank-note.

“For God’s sake?not that!” Campton cried, bringing his hand down on the
banker’s. Leaning over, he spoke to the sentinel. “My son’s dying at the
front. Can’t you see it when you look at me?”

The man looked, and slowly gave back the paper. “You can pass,” he said,
shouldering his rifle.

The motor shot on, and the two men drew back into their corners. Mr.
Brant fidgeted with his eye-glasses, and after an interval coughed
again. “I must thank you,” he began, “for?for saving me just now from an
inexcusable blunder. It was done mechanically ... one gets into the
habit....”

“Quite so,” said Campton drily. “But there are cases??”

“Of course?of course.”

Silence fell once more. Mr. Brant sat bolt upright, his profile detached
against the wintry fields. Campton, sunk into his corner, glanced now
and then at the neat grey silhouette, in which the perpendicular glint
of the eye-glass nearest him was the only point of light. He said to
himself that the man was no doubt suffering horribly; but he was not
conscious of any impulse of compassion. He and Mr. Brant were like two
strangers pinned down together in a railway-smash: the shared agony did
not bring them nearer. On the contrary, Campton, as the hours passed,
felt himself more and more exasperated by the mute anguish at his side.
What right had this man to be suffering as he himself was suffering,
what right to be here with him at all? It was simply in the exercise of
what the banker called his “habit”?the habit of paying, of buying
everything, people and privileges and possessions?that he had acquired
this ghastly claim to share in an agony which was not his.

“I shan’t even have my boy to myself on his deathbed,” the father
thought in desperation; and the mute presence at his side became once
more the symbol of his own failure.

The motor, with frequent halts, continued to crawl slowly on between
lorries, field-kitchens, artillery wagons, companies of haggard infantry
returning to their cantonments, and more and more vanloads of troops
pressing forward; it seemed to Campton that hours elapsed before Mr.
Brant again spoke.

“This must be Amiens,” he said, in a voice even lower than usual.

The father roused himself and looked out. They were passing through the
streets of a town swarming with troops?but he was still barely conscious
of what he looked at. He perceived that he had been half-asleep, and
dreaming of George as a little boy, when he used to have such bad colds.
Campton remembered in particular the day he had found the lad in bed, in
a scarlet sweater, in his luxurious overheated room, reading the first
edition of Lavengro. It was on that day that he and his son had first
really got to know each other; but what was it that had marked the date
to George? The fact that Mr. Brant, learning of his joy in the book, had
instantly presented it to him?with the price-label left inside the
cover.

“And it’ll be worth a lot more than that by the time you’re grown up,”
Mr. Brant had told his stepson; to which George was recorded to have
answered sturdily: “No, it won’t, if I find other stories I like
better.”

Miss Anthony had assisted at the conversation and reported it
triumphantly to Campton; but the painter, who had to save up to give his
boy even a simple present, could see in the incident only one more
attempt to rob him of his rights. “They won’t succeed, though, they
won’t succeed: they don’t know how to go about it, thank the Lord,” he
had said.

But they had succeeded after all; what better proof of it was there than
Mr. Brant’s tacit right to be sitting here beside him to-day; than the
fact that but for Mr. Brant it might have been impossible for Campton to
get to his boy’s side in time?

Oh, that pitiless incessant hammering of the guns! As the travellers
advanced the noise grew louder, fiercer, more unbroken; the
closely-fitted panes of the car rattled and danced like those of an old
omnibus. Sentinels stopped the chauffeur more frequently; Mr. Brant had
to produce the blue paper again and again. The day was wearing
on?Campton began again to be aware of a sick weariness, a growing
remoteness and confusion of mind. Through it he perceived that Mr.
Brant, diving into deeper recesses of upholstery, had brought out a
silver sandwich-box, a flask and glasses. As by magic they stood on a
shiny shelf which slid out of another recess, and Mr. Brant was
proffering the box. “It’s a long way yet; you’ll need all your
strength,” he said.

Campton, who had half turned from the invitation, seized a sandwich and
emptied one of the glasses. Mr. Brant was right; he must not let himself
float away into the void, seductive as its drowsy shimmer was.

His wits returned, and with them a more intolerable sense of reality. He
was all alive now. Every crash of the guns seemed to tear a piece of
flesh from his body; and it was always the piece nearest the heart. The
nurse’s few lines had said: “A shell wound: the right arm fractured,
fear for the lungs.” And one of these awful crashes had done it:
bursting in mystery from that innocent-looking sky, and rushing
inoffensively over hundreds of other young men till it reached its
destined prey, found George, and dug a red grave for him. Campton was
convinced now that his son was dead. It was not only that he had
received the Legion of Honour; it was the appalling all-destroying
thunder of the shells as they went on crashing and bursting. What could
they leave behind them but mismated fragments? Gathering up all his
strength in the effort not to recoil from the vision, Campton saw his
son’s beautiful body like a carcass tumbled out of a butcher’s cart....

                  *       *       *       *       *

“Doullens,” said Mr. Brant.

They were in a town, and the motor had turned into the court of a great
barrack-like building. Before them stood a line of empty stretchers such
as Campton had seen at Chalons. A young doctor in a cotton blouse was
lighting a cigarette and laughing with a nurse?laughing! At regular
intervals the cannonade shook the windows; it seemed the heart-beat of
the place. Campton noticed that many of the window-panes had been
broken, and patched with paper.

Inside they found another official, who called to another nurse as she
passed by laden with fresh towels. She disappeared into a room where
heaps of bloody linen were being stacked into baskets, returned, looked
at Campton and nodded. He looked back at her blunt tired features and
kindly eyes, and said to himself that they had perhaps been his son’s
last sight on earth.

The nurse smiled.

“It’s three flights up,” she said; “he’ll be glad.”

Glad! He was not dead, then; he could even be glad! In the staggering
rush of relief the father turned instinctively to Mr. Brant; he felt
that there was enough joy to be shared. But Mr. Brant, though he must
have heard what the nurse had said, was moving away; he did not seem to
understand.

“This way??” Campton called after him, pointing to the nurse, who was
already on the first step of the stairs.

Mr. Brant looked slightly puzzled; then, as the other’s meaning reached
him, he coloured a little, bent his head stiffly, and waved his stick
toward the door.

“Thanks,” he said, “I think I’ll take a stroll first ... stretch my
legs....” and Campton, with a rush of gratitude, understood that he was
to be left alone with his son.




                                  XXV


He followed his guide up the steep flights, which seemed to become
buoyant and lift him like waves. It was as if the muscle that always
dragged back his lame leg had suddenly regained its elasticity. He
floated up as one mounts stairs in a dream. A smell of disinfectants
hung in the cold air, and once, through a half-open door, a sickening
odour came: he remembered it at Chalons, and Fortin’s murmured:
“Gangrene?ah, if only we could get them sooner!”

How soon had they got _his_ boy, Campton wondered? The letter,
mercifully sent by hand to Paris, had reached him on the third day after
George’s arrival at the Doullens hospital; but he did not yet know how
long before that the shell-splinter had done its work. The nurse did not
know either. How could she remember? They had so many! The administrator
would look up the files and tell him. Only there was no time for that
now.

On a landing Campton heard a babble and scream: a nauseating scream in a
queer bleached voice that might have been man, woman or monkey’s.
Perhaps that was what the French meant by “a white voice”: this voice
which was as featureless as some of the poor men’s obliterated faces!
Campton shot an anguished look at his companion, and she understood and
shook her head. “Oh, no: that’s in the big ward. It’s the way they
scream after a dressing....”

She opened a door, and he was in a room with three beds in it, wooden
pallets hastily knocked together and spread with rough grey blankets. In
spite of the cold, flies still swarmed on the unwashed panes, and there
were big holes in the fly-net over the bed nearest the window. Under the
net lay a middle-aged bearded man, heavily bandaged about the chest and
left arm: he was snoring, his mouth open, his gaunt cheeks drawn in with
the fight for breath. Campton said to himself that if his own boy lived
he should like some day to do something for this poor devil who was his
roommate. Then he looked about him and saw that the two other beds were
empty.

He drew back.

The nurse was bending over the bearded man. “He’ll wake presently?I’ll
leave you”; and she slipped out. Campton looked again at the stranger;
then his glance travelled to the scarred brown hand on the sheet, a hand
with broken nails and blackened finger-tips. It was George’s hand, his
son’s, swollen, disfigured but unmistakable. The father knelt down and
laid his lips on it.

                  *       *       *       *       *

“What was the first thing you felt?” Adele Anthony asked him afterward:
and he answered: “Nothing.”

“Yes?at the very first, I know: it’s always like that. But the first
thing _after_ you began to feel anything?”

He considered, and then said slowly: “The difference.”

“The difference in _him_?”

“In him?in life?in everything.”

Miss Anthony, who understood as a rule, was evidently puzzled. “What
kind of a difference?”

“Oh, a complete difference.” With that she had to be content.

The sense of it had first come to Campton when the bearded man, raising
his lids, looked at him from far off with George’s eyes, and touched
him, very feebly, with George’s hand. It was in the moment of
identifying his son that he felt the son he had known to be lost to him
forever.

George’s lips were moving, and the father laid his ear to them; perhaps
these were last words that his boy was saying.

“Old Dad?in a motor?”

Campton nodded.

The fact seemed faintly to interest George, who continued to examine him
with those distant eyes.

“Uncle Andy’s?”

Campton nodded again.

“Mother???”

“She’s coming too?very soon.”

George’s lips were screwed into a whimsical smile. “I must have a shave
first,” he said, and drowsed off again, his hand in Campton’s....

                  *       *       *       *       *

“The other gentleman??” the nurse questioned the next morning.

Campton had spent the night in the hospital, stretched on the floor at
his son’s threshold. It was a breach of rules, but for once the major
had condoned it. As for Mr. Brant, Campton had forgotten all about him,
and at first did not know what the nurse meant. Then he woke with a
start to the consciousness of his fellow-traveller’s nearness. Mr.
Brant, the nurse explained, had come to the hospital early, and had been
waiting below for the last two hours. Campton, almost as gaunt and
unshorn as his son, pulled himself to his feet and went down. In the
hall the banker, very white, but smooth and trim as ever, was patiently
measuring the muddy flags.

“Less temperature this morning,” Campton called from the last flight.

“Oh,” stammered Mr. Brant, red and pale by turns.

Campton smiled haggardly and pulled himself together in an effort of
communicativeness. “Look here?he’s asked for you; you’d better go up.
Only for a few minutes, please; he’s awfully weak.”

Mr. Brant, speechless, stood stiffly waiting to be conducted. Campton
noticed the mist in his eyes, and took pity on him.

“I say?where’s the hotel? Just a step away? I’ll go around, then, and
get a shave and a wash while you’re with him,” the father said, with a
magnanimity which he somehow felt the powers might take account of in
their subsequent dealings with George. If the boy was to live Campton
could afford to be generous; and he had decided to assume that the boy
would live, and to order his behaviour accordingly.

“I?thank you,” said Mr. Brant, turning toward the stairs.

“Five minutes at the outside!” Campton cautioned him, and hurried out
into the morning air through which the guns still crashed methodically.

When he got back to the hospital, refreshed and decent, he was
surprised, and for a moment alarmed, to find that Mr. Brant had not come
down.

“Sending up his temperature, of course?damn him!” Campton raged,
scrambling up the stairs as fast as his stiff leg permitted. But outside
of George’s door he saw a small figure patiently mounting guard.

“I stayed with him less than five minutes; I was merely waiting to thank
you.”

“Oh, that’s all right.” Campton paused, and then made his supreme
effort. “How does he strike you?”

“Hopefully?hopefully. He had his joke as usual,” Mr. Brant said with a
twitching smile.

“Oh, _that_??! But his temperature’s decidedly lower. Of course they may
have to take the ball out of the lung; but perhaps before they do it he
can be moved from this hell.”

The two men were silent, the same passion of anxiety consuming them, and
no means left of communicating it to each other.

“I’ll look in again later. Shall I have something to eat sent round to
you from the hotel?” Mr. Brant suggested.

“Oh, thanks?if you would.”

Campton put out his hand and crushed Mr. Brant’s dry fingers. But for
this man he might not have got to his son in time; and this man had not
once made use of the fact to press his own claim on George. With pity in
his heart, the father, privileged to remain at his son’s bedside,
watched Mr. Brant’s small figure retreating alone. How ghastly to sit
all day in that squalid hotel, his eyes on his watch, with nothing to do
but to wonder and wonder about the temperature of another man’s son!

                  *       *       *       *       *

The next day was worse; so much worse that everything disappeared from
Campton’s view but the present agony of watching, hovering, hanging
helplessly on the words of nurse and doctor, and spying on the glances
they exchanged behind his back.

There could be no thought yet of extracting the bullet; a great surgeon,
passing through the wards on a hasty tour of inspection, had confirmed
this verdict. Oh, to have kept the surgeon there?to have had him at hand
to watch for the propitious moment and seize it without an instant’s
delay! Suddenly the vision which to Campton had been among the most
hideous of all his crowding nightmares?that of George stretched naked on
an operating-table, his face hidden by a chloroform mask, and an orderly
hurrying away with a pile of red towels like those perpetually carried
through the passages below?this vision became to the father’s fevered
mind as soothing as a glimpse of Paradise. If only George’s temperature
would go down?if only the doctors would pronounce him strong enough to
have the bullet taken out! What would anything else matter then? Campton
would feel as safe as he used to years ago, when after the recurring
months of separation the boy came back from school, and he could take
him in his arms and make sure that he was the same Georgie, only bigger,
browner, with thicker curlier hair, and tougher muscles under his
jacket.

What if the great surgeon, on his way back from the front, were to pass
through the town again that evening, reverse his verdict, and perhaps
even perform the operation then and there? Was there no way of
prevailing on him to stop and take another look at George on the return?
The idea took immediate possession of Campton, crowding out his
intolerable anguish, and bringing such relief that for a few seconds he
felt as if some life-saving operation had been performed on himself. As
he stood watching the great man’s retreat, followed by doctors and
nurses, Mr. Brant suddenly touched his arm, and the eyes of the two met.
Campton understood and gasped out: “Yes, yes; we must manage to get him
back.”

Mr. Brant nodded. “At all costs.” He paused, again interrogated
Campton’s eyes, and stammered: “You authorize???”

“Oh, God?anything!”

“He’s dined at my house in Paris,” Mr. Brant threw in, as if trying to
justify himself.

“Oh, go?_go_!” Campton almost pushed him down the stairs. Ten minutes
later he reappeared, modest but exultant.

“Well?”

“He wouldn’t commit himself, before the others??”

“Oh??”

“But to me, as he was getting into the motor??”

“Well?”

“Yes: if possible. Somewhere about midnight.”

Campton turned away, choking, and stumped off toward the tall window at
the end of the passage. Below him lay the court. A line of stretchers
was being carried across it, not empty this time, but each one with a
bloody burden. Doctors, nurses, orderlies hurried to and fro. Drub,
drub, drub, went the guns, shaking the windows, rolling their fierce din
along the cloudy sky, down the corridors of the hospital and the
pavement of the streets, like huge bowls crashing through story above
story of a kind of sky-scraping bowling alley.

“Even the dead underground must hear them!” Campton muttered.

The word made him shudder superstitiously, and he crept back to George’s
door and opened it; but the nurse, within, shook her head.

“He must sleep after the examination. Better go.”

Campton turned and saw Mr. Brant waiting. A bell rang twelve. The two,
in silence, walked down the stairs, crossed the court (averting their
eyes from the stretchers) and went to the hotel to get something to eat.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Midnight came. It passed. No one in the hurried confused world of the
hospital had heard of the possibility of the surgeon’s returning. When
Campton mentioned it to the nurse she smiled her tired smile, and said:
“He could have done nothing.”

Done nothing! How could she know? How could any one, but the surgeon
himself? Would he have promised if he had not thought there was some
chance? Campton, stretched out on a blanket and his rolled-up coat, lay
through the long restless hours staring at the moonlit sky framed by the
window of the corridor. Great clouds swept over that cold indifferent
vault: they seemed like the smoke from the guns which had not once
ceased through the night. At last he got up, turned his back on the
window, and lay down again facing the stairs. The moonlight unrolled a
white strip along the stone floor. A church-bell rang one ... two ...
there were noises and movements below. Campton raised himself, his heart
beating all over his body. Steps came echoing up.

“Careful!” some one called. A stretcher rounded the stair-rail; another,
and then another. An orderly with a lantern preceded them, followed by
one of the doctors, an old bunched-up man in a muddy uniform, who
stopped furtively to take a pinch of snuff. Campton could not believe
his eyes; didn’t the hospital people know that every bed on that floor
was full? Every bed, that is, but the two in George’s room; and the
nurse had given Campton the hope, the promise almost, that as long as
his boy was so ill she would keep those empty. “I’ll manage somehow,”
she had said.

For a mad moment Campton was on the point of throwing himself in the way
of the tragic procession, barring the threshold with his arms. “What
does this mean?” he stammered to the nurse, who had appeared from
another room with her little lamp.

She gave a shrug. “More casualties?every hospital is like this.”

He stood aside, wrathful, impotent. At least if Brant had been there,
perhaps by some offer of money?but how, to whom? Of what earthly use,
after all, was Brant’s boasted “influence”? These people would only
laugh at him?perhaps put them both out of the hospital!

He turned despairingly to the nurse. “You might as well have left him in
the trenches.”

“Don’t say that, sir,” she answered; and the echo of his own words
horrified him like a sacrilege.

Two of the stretchers were carried into George’s room. Campton caught a
glimpse of George, muttering and tossing; the moonlight lay in the
hollows of his bearded face, and again the father had the sense of utter
alienation from that dark delirious man who for brief intervals suddenly
became his son, and then as suddenly wandered off into strangeness.

The nurse slipped out of the room and signed to him.

“Both nearly gone ... they won’t trouble him long,” she whispered.

The man on the third stretcher was taken to a room at the other end of
the corridor. Campton watched him being lifted in. He was to lie on the
floor, then? For in that room there was certainly no vacancy. But
presently he had the answer. The bearers did not come out empty-handed;
they carried another man whom they laid on the empty stretcher. Lucky,
lucky devil; going, no doubt, to a hospital at the rear! As the
procession reached the stairs the lantern swung above the lucky devil’s
face: his eyes stared ceilingward from black orbits. One arm, swinging
loose, dangled down, the hand stealthily counting the steps as he
descended?and no one troubled, for he was dead.

At dawn Campton, who must have been asleep, started up, again hearing
steps. The surgeon? Oh, if this time it were the surgeon! But only Mr.
Brant detached himself from the shadows accumulated in the long
corridor: Mr. Brant, crumpled and unshorn, with blood-shot eyes, and
gloves on his unconscious hands.

Campton glared at him resentfully.

“Well?how about your surgeon? I don’t see him!” he exclaimed.

Mr. Brant shook his head despondently. “No?I’ve been waiting all night
in the court. I thought if he came back I should be the first to catch
him. But he has just sent his orderly for instruments; he’s not coming.
There’s been terrible fighting??”

Campton saw two tears running down Mr. Brant’s face: they did not move
him.

The banker glanced toward George’s door, full of the question he dared
not put.

Campton answered it. “You want to know how he is? Well, how should he
be, with that bullet in him, and the fever eating him inch by inch, and
two more wounded men in his room? _That’s_ how he is!” Campton almost
shouted.

Mr. Brant was trembling all over.

“Two more men?in his room?” he echoed shrilly.

“Yes?bad cases; dying.” Campton drew a deep breath. “You see there are
times when your money and your influence and your knowing everybody are
no more use than so much sawdust??”

The nurse opened the door and looked out. “You’re talking too loudly,”
she said.

She shut the door, and the two men stood silent, abashed; finally Mr.
Brant turned away. “I’ll go and try again. There must be other surgeons
... other ways ...” he whispered.

“Oh, your surgeons ... oh, your ways!” Campton sneered after him, in the
same whisper.




                                  XXVI


From the room where he sat at the foot of George’s glossy white bed,
Campton, through the open door, could watch the November sun slanting
down a white ward where, in the lane between other white beds, pots of
chrysanthemums stood on white-covered tables.

Through the window his eyes rested incredulously on a court enclosed in
monastic arches of grey stone, with squares of turf bordered by box
hedges, and a fountain playing. Beyond the court sloped the faded
foliage of a park not yet entirely stripped by Channel gales; and on
days without wind, instead of the boom of the guns, the roar of the sea
came faintly over intervening heights and hollows.

Campton’s ears were even more incredulous than his eyes. He was
gradually coming to believe in George’s white room, the ward beyond, the
flowers between the beds, the fountain in the court; but the sound of
the sea still came to him, intolerably but unescapably, as the crash of
guns. When the impression was too overwhelming he would turn away from
the window and cast his glance on the bed; but only to find that the
smooth young face on the pillow had suddenly changed into that of the
haggard bearded stranger on the wooden pallet at Doullens. And Campton
would have to get up, lean over, and catch the twinkle in George’s eyes
before the evil spell was broken.

Few words passed between them. George, after all these days, was still
too weak for much talk; and silence had always been Campton’s escape
from feeling. He never had the need to speak in times of inward stress,
unless it were to vent his anger?as in that hateful scene at Doullens
between himself and Mr. Brant. But he was sure that George always knew
what was passing through his mind; that when the sea boomed their
thoughts flew back together to that other scene, but a few miles and a
few days distant, yet already as far off, as much an affair they were
both rid of, as a nightmare to a wakened sleeper; and that for a moment
the same vision clutched them both, mocking their attempts at
indifference.

Not that the sound, to Campton at any rate, suggested any abstract
conception of war. Looking back afterward at this phase of his life he
perceived that at no time had he thought so little of the war. The noise
of the sea was to him simply the voice of the engine which had so nearly
destroyed his son: that association, deeply embedded in his half-dazed
consciousness, left no room for others.

The general impression of unreality was enhanced by his not having yet
been able to learn the details of George’s wounding. After a week during
which the boy had hung near death, the great surgeon?returning to
Doullens just as Campton had finally ceased to hope for him?had
announced that, though George’s state was still grave, he might be moved
to a hospital at the rear. So one day, miraculously, the perilous
transfer had been made, in one of Mrs. Brant’s own motor-ambulances; and
for a week now George had lain in his white bed, hung over by
white-gowned Sisters, in an atmosphere of sweetness and order which
almost made it seem as if he were a child recovering from illness in his
own nursery, or a red-haired baby sparring with dimpled fists at a new
world.

In truth, Campton found his son as hard to get at as a baby; he looked
at his father with eyes as void of experience, or at least of any means
of conveying it. Campton, at first, could only marvel and wait; and the
isolation in which the two were enclosed by George’s weakness, and by
his father’s inability to learn from others what the boy was not yet
able to tell him, gave a strange remoteness to everything but the things
which count in an infant’s world: food, warmth, sleep. Campton’s nearest
approach to reality was his daily scrutiny of the temperature-chart. He
studied it as he used to study the _communiques_ which he now no longer
even thought of.

Sometimes when George was asleep Campton would sit pondering on the days
at Doullens. There was an exquisite joy in silently building up, on that
foundation of darkness and anguish, the walls of peace that now
surrounded him, a structure so transparent that one could peer through
it at the routed Furies, yet so impenetrable that he sat there in a kind
of god-like aloofness. For one thing he was especially thankful?and that
was the conclusion of his unseemly wrangle with Mr. Brant; thankful
that, almost at once, he had hurried after the banker, caught up with
him, and stammered out, clutching his hand: “I know?I know how you
feel.”

Mr. Brant’s reactions were never rapid, and the events of the preceding
days had called upon faculties that were almost atrophied. He had merely
looked at Campton in mute distress, returned his pressure, and silently
remounted the hospital stairs with him.

Campton hated himself for his ill-temper, but was glad, even at the
time, that no interested motive had prompted his apology. He should have
hated himself even more if he had asked the banker’s pardon because of
Mr. Brant’s “pull,” and the uses to which it might be put; or even if he
had associated his excuses with any past motives of gratitude, such as
the fact that but for Mr. Brant he might never have reached George’s
side. Instead of that, he simply felt that once more his senseless
violence had got the better of him, and he was sorry that he had behaved
like a brute to a man who loved George, and was suffering almost as much
as he was at the thought that George might die....

After that episode, and Campton’s apology, the relations of the two men
became so easy that each gradually came to take the other for granted;
and Mr. Brant, relieved of a perpetual hostile scrutiny, was free to
exercise his ingenuity in planning and managing. It was owing to
him?Campton no longer minded admitting it?that the famous surgeon had
hastened his return to Doullens, that George’s translation to the sweet
monastic building near the sea had been so rapidly effected, and that
the great man, appearing there soon afterward, had extracted the bullet
with his own hand. But for Mr. Brant’s persistence even the leave to
bring one of Mrs. Brant’s motor-ambulances to Doullens would never have
been given; and it might have been fatal to George to make the journey
in a slow and jolting military train. But for Mr. Brant, again, he would
have been sent to a crowded military hospital instead of being brought
to this white heaven of rest. “And all that just because I overtook him
in time to prevent his jumping into his motor and going back to Paris in
order to get out of my way!” Campton, at the thought, lowered his spirit
into new depths of contrition.

                  *       *       *       *       *

George, who had been asleep, opened his eyes and looked at his father.

“Where’s Uncle Andy?”

“Gone to Paris to get your mother.”

“Yes. Of course. He told me??”

George smiled, and withdrew once more into his secret world.

But Campton’s state of mind was less happy. As the time of Julia’s
arrival approached he began to ask himself with increasing apprehension
how she would fit into the situation. Mr. Brant _had_ fitted into
it?perfectly. Campton had actually begun to feel a secret dependence on
him, a fidgety uneasiness since he had left for Paris, sweet though it
was to be alone with George. But Julia?what might she not do and say to
unsettle things, break the spell, agitate and unnerve them all? Campton
did not question her love for her son; but he was not sure what form it
would take in conditions to which she was so unsuited. How could she
ever penetrate into the mystery of peace which enclosed him and his boy?
And if she felt them thus mysteriously shut off would she not dimly
resent her exclusion? If only Adele Anthony had been coming too! Campton
had urged Mr. Brant to bring her; but the banker had failed to obtain a
permit for any one but the boy’s mother. He had even found it difficult
to get his own leave renewed; it was only after a first trip to Paris,
and repeated efforts at the War Office, that he had been allowed to go
to Paris and fetch his wife, who was just arriving from Biarritz.

Well?for the moment, at any rate, Campton had the boy to himself. As he
sat there, trying to picture the gradual resurrection of George’s
pre-war face out of the delicately pencilled white mask on the pillow,
he noted the curious change of planes produced by suffering and
emaciation, and the altered relation of lights and shadows. Materially
speaking, the new George looked like the old one seen in the bowl of a
spoon, and through blue spectacles: peaked, narrow, livid, with
elongated nose and sunken eye-sockets. But these altered proportions
were not what had really changed him. There was something in the curve
of the mouth that fever and emaciation could not account for. In that
new line, and in the look of his eyes?the look travelling slowly outward
through a long blue tunnel, like some mysterious creature rising from
the depths of the sea?that was where the new George lurked, the George
to be watched and lain in wait for, patiently and slowly puzzled out....

He reopened his eyes.

“Adele too?”

Campton had learned to bridge over the spaces between the questions.
“No; not this time. We tried, but it couldn’t be managed. A little
later, I hope??”

“She’s all right?”

“Rather! Blooming.”

“And Boylston?”

“Blooming too.”

George’s lids closed contentedly, like doors shutting him away from the
world.

It was the first time since his operation that he had asked about any of
his friends, or had appeared to think they might come to see him. But
his mind, like his stomach, could receive very little nutriment at a
time; he liked to have one mouthful given to him, and then to lie
ruminating it in the lengthening intervals between his attacks of pain.

Each time he asked for news of any one his father wondered what name
would next come to his lips. Even during his delirium he had mentioned
no one but his parents, Mr. Brant, Adele Anthony and Boylston; yet it
was not possible, Campton thought, that these formed the circumference
of his life, that some contracted fold of memory did not hold a nearer
image, a more secret name.... The father’s heart beat faster, half from
curiosity, half from a kind of shy delicacy, at the thought that at any
moment that name might wake in George and utter itself.

Campton’s thoughts again turned to his wife. With Julia there was never
any knowing. Ten to one she would send the boy’s temperature up. He was
thankful that, owing to the difficulty of getting the news to her, and
then of bringing her back from a frontier department, so many days had
had to elapse.

But when she arrived, nothing, after all, happened as he had expected.
She had put on her nurse’s dress for the journey (he thought it rather
theatrical of her, till he remembered how much easier it was to get
about in any sort of uniform); but there was not a trace of coquetry in
her appearance. As a frame for her haggard unpowdered face the white
coif looked harsh and unbecoming; she reminded him, as she got out of
the motor, of some mortified Jansenist nun from one of Philippe de
Champaigne’s canvases.

Campton led her to George’s door, but left her there; she did not appear
to notice whether or not he was following her. He whispered: “Careful
about his temperature; he’s very weak,” and she bent her profile
silently as she went in.




                                 XXVII


George, that evening, seemed rather better, and his temperature had not
gone up: Campton had to repress a movement of jealousy at Julia’s having
done her son no harm. Her experience as a nurse, disciplining a vague
gift for the sickroom, had developed in her the faculty of self-command:
before the war, if George had met with a dangerous accident, she would
have been more encumbering than helpful.

Campton had to admit the change, but it did not draw them any nearer.
Her manner of loving their son was too different. Nowadays, when he and
Anderson Brant were together, he felt that they were thinking of the
same things in the same way; but Julia’s face, even aged and humanized
by grief, was still a mere mask to him. He could never tell what form
her thoughts about George might be taking.

Mr. Brant, on his wife’s arrival, had judged it discreet to efface
himself. Campton hunted for him in vain in the park, and under the
cloister; he remained invisible till they met at the early dinner which
they shared with the staff. But the meal did not last long, and when it
was over, and nurses and doctors scattered, Mr. Brant again slipped
away, leaving his wife and Campton alone.

Campton glanced after him, surprised. “Why does he go?”

Mrs. Brant pursed her lips, evidently as much surprised by his question
as he by her husband’s withdrawal.

“I suppose he’s going to bed?to be ready for his early start to-morrow.”

“A start?”

She stared. “He’s going back to Paris.”

Campton was genuinely astonished. “Is he? I’m sorry.”

“Oh??” She seemed unprepared for this. “After all, you must see?we can’t
very well ... all three of us ... especially with these nuns....”

“Oh, if it’s only _that_??”

She did not take this up, and one of their usual silences followed.
Campton was thinking that it was all nonsense about the nuns, and
meditating on the advisability of going in pursuit of Mr. Brant to tell
him so. He dreaded the prospect of a long succession of days alone
between George and George’s mother.

Mrs. Brant spoke again. “I was sorry to find that the Sisters have been
kept on here. Are they much with George?”

“The Sisters? I don’t know. The upper nurses are Red Cross, as you saw.
But of course the others are about a good deal. What’s wrong? They seem
to me perfect.”

She hesitated and coloured a little. “I don’t want them to find
out?about the Extreme Unction,” she finally said.

Campton repeated her words blankly. He began to think that anxiety and
fatigue had confused her mind.

She coloured more deeply. “Oh, I forgot?you don’t know. I couldn’t think
of anything but George at first ... and the whole thing is so painful to
me.... Where’s my bag?”

She groped for her reticule, found it in the folds of the cloak she had
kept about her shoulders, and fumbled in it with wrinkled jewelled
fingers.

“Anderson hasn’t spoken to you, then?spoken about Mrs. Talkett?” she
asked suddenly.

“About Mrs. Talkett? Why should he? What on earth has happened?”

“Oh, I wouldn’t see her myself ... I couldn’t ... so he had to. She had
to be thanked, of course ... but it seems to me so dreadful, so very
dreadful ... _our_ boy ... that woman....”

Campton did not press her further. He sat dumbfounded, trying to take in
what she was so obviously trying to communicate, and yet instinctively
resisting the approach of the revelation he foresaw.

“George?_Mrs. Talkett_?” He forced himself to couple the two names,
unnatural as their union seemed.

“I supposed you knew. Isn’t it dreadful? A woman old enough??” She drew
a letter from her bag.

He interrupted her. “Is that letter what you want to show me?”

“Yes. She insisted on Anderson’s keeping it?for you. She said it
belonged to us, I believe.... It seems there was a promise?made the
night before he was mobilised?that if anything happened he would get
word to her.... No thought of _us_!” She began to whimper.

Campton reached out for the letter. Mrs. Talkett?Madge Talkett and
George! That was where the boy had gone then, that last night when his
father, left alone at the Crillon, had been so hurt by his desertion!
That was the name which, in his hours of vigil in the little white room,
Campton had watched for on his son’s lips, the name which, one day,
sooner or later, he would have to hear them pronounce.... How little he
had thought, as he sat studying the mysterious beauty of George’s face,
what a commonplace secret it concealed!

The writing was not George’s, but that of an unlettered French soldier.
Campton, glancing at the signature, recalled it as that of his son’s
orderly, who had been slightly wounded in the same attack as George, and
sent for twenty-four hours to the same hospital at Doullens. He had been
at George’s side when he fell, and with the simple directness often
natural to his class in France he told the tale of his lieutenant’s
wounding, in circumstances which appeared to have given George great
glory in the eyes of his men. They thought the wound mortal; but the
orderly and a stretcher-bearer had managed to get the young man into the
shelter of a little wood. The stretcher-bearer, it turned out, was a
priest. He had at once applied the consecrated oil, and George, still
conscious, had received it “with a beautiful smile”; then the orderly,
thinking all was over, had hurried back to the fighting, and been
wounded. The next day he too had been carried to Doullens; and there,
after many enquiries, he had found his lieutenant in the same hospital,
alive, but too ill to see him.

He had contrived, however, to see the nurse, and had learned from her
that the doctors had not given up hope. With that he had to be content;
but before returning to his base he had hastened to fulfill his
lieutenant’s instructions (given “many months earlier”) by writing to
tell “his lady” that he was severely wounded, but still alive?“which is
a good deal in itself,” the orderly hopefully ended, “not to mention his
receiving the Legion of Honour.”

Campton laid the letter down. There was too much to be taken in all at
once; and, as usual in moments of deep disturbance, he wanted to be
alone, above all wanted to be away from Julia. But Julia held him with
insistent eyes.

“Do you want this?” he asked finally, pushing the letter toward her.

She recoiled. “Want it? A letter written to that woman? No! I should
have returned it at once?but Anderson wouldn’t let me.... Think of her
forcing herself upon me as she did?and making you paint her portrait! I
see it all now. Had you any idea this was going on?”

Campton shook his head, and perceived by her look of relief that what
she had resented above all was the thought of his being in a secret of
George’s from which she herself was excluded.

“Adele didn’t know either,” she said, with evident satisfaction. Campton
remembered that he had been struck by Miss Anthony’s look of sincerity
when he had asked her if she had any idea where George had spent his
last evening, and she had answered negatively. This recollection made
him understand Mrs. Brant’s feeling of relief.

“Perhaps, after all, it’s only a flirtation?a mere sentimental
friendship,” he hazarded.

“A flirtation?” Mrs. Brant’s Mater Dolorosa face suddenly sharpened to
worldly astuteness. “A sentimental friendship? Have you ever heard
George mention her name?or make any sort of allusion to such a
friendship?”

Campton considered. “No. I don’t remember his ever speaking of her.”

“Well, then??” Her eyes had the irritated look he had seen on the
far-off day when he had thrown Beausite’s dinner invitation into the
fire. Once more, they seemed to say, she had taken the measure of his
worldly wisdom.

George’s silence?his care not even to mention that the Talketts were so
much as known to him?certainly made it look as though the matter went
deep with him. Campton, recalling the tone of the Talkett drawing-room
and its familiars, had an even stronger recoil of indignation than
Julia’s; but he was silenced by a dread of tampering with his son’s
privacy, a sense of the sacredness of everything pertaining to that
still-mysterious figure in the white bed upstairs.

Mrs. Brant’s face had clouded again. “It’s all so dreadful?and this
Extreme Unction too! What is it exactly, do you know? A sort of baptism?
Will the Roman Church try to get hold of him on the strength of it?”

Campton remembered with a faint inward amusement that, in spite of her
foreign bringing-up, and all her continental affinities, Julia had
remained as implacably and incuriously Protestant as if all her life she
had heard the Scarlet Woman denounced from Presbyterian pulpits. At
another time it would have amused him to ponder on this one streak in
her of the ancestral iron; but now he wanted only to console her.

“Oh, no?it was just the accident of the priest’s being there. One of our
chaplains would have done the same kind of thing.”

She looked at him mistrustfully. “The same kind of thing? It’s never the
same with them! Whatever they do reaches ahead. I’ve seen such advantage
taken of the wounded when they were too weak to resist ... didn’t know
what they were saying or doing....” Her eyes filled with tears. “A
priest and a woman?I feel as if I’d lost my boy!”

The words went through Campton like a sword, and he sprang to his feet.
“Oh, for God’s sake be quiet?don’t say it! What does anything matter but
that he’s alive?”

“Of course, of course ... I didn’t mean.... But that he should think
only of _her_, and not of us ... that he should have deceived us ...
about everything ... everything....”

“Ah, don’t say that either! Don’t tempt Providence! If he deceived us,
as you call it, we’ve no one but ourselves to blame; you and I,
and?well, and Brant. Didn’t we all do our best to make him deceive
us?with our intriguing and our wire-pulling and our cowardice? How he
despised us for it?yes, thank God, how he despised us from the first! He
didn’t hide the truth from Boylston or Adele, because they were the only
two on a level with him. And _they_ knew why he’d deceived us; they
understood him, they abetted him from the first.” He stopped, checked by
Mrs. Brant’s pale bewildered face, and the eyes imploringly lifted, as
if to ward off unintelligible words.

“Ah, well, all this is no use,” he said; “we’ve got him safe, and it’s
more than we deserve.” He laid his hand on her shoulder. “Go to bed;
you’re dead-beat. Only don’t say things?things that might wake up the
Furies....”

He pocketed the letter and went out in search of Mr. Brant, followed by
her gaze of perplexity.

The latter was smoking a last cigar as he paced up and down the cloister
with upturned coat-collar. Silence lay on the carefully darkened
building, crouching low under an icy sea-fog; at intervals, through the
hush, the waves continued to mimic the booming of the guns.

Campton drew out the orderly’s letter. “I hear you’re leaving to-morrow
early, and I suppose I’d better give this back,” he said.

Mr. Brant had evidently expected him. “Oh, thanks. But Mrs. Talkett says
she has no right to it.”

“No right to it? That’s a queer thing to say.”

“So I thought. I suppose she meant, till you’d seen it. She was
dreadfully upset ... till she saw me she’d supposed he was dead.”

Campton shivered. “She sent this to your house?”

“Yes; the moment she got it. It was waiting there when my?when Julia
arrived.”

“And you went to thank her?”

“Yes.” Mr. Brant hesitated. “Julia disliked to keep the letter. And I
thought it only proper to take it back myself.”

“Certainly. And?what was your impression?”

Mr. Brant hesitated again. He had already, Campton felt, reached the
utmost limit of his power of communicativeness. It was against all his
habits to “commit himself.” Finally he said, in an unsteady voice: “It
was impossible not to feel sorry for her.”

“Did she say?er?anything special? Anything about herself and??”

“No; not a word. She was?well, all broken up, as they say.”

“Poor thing!” Campton murmured.

“Yes?oh, yes!” Mr. Brant held the letter, turning it thoughtfully about.
“It’s a great thing,” he began abruptly, as if the words were beyond his
control, “to have such a beautiful account of the affair. George
himself, of course, would never??”

“No, never.” Campton considered. “You must take it back to her,
naturally. But I should like to have a copy first.”

Mr. Brant put a hand in his pocket. “I supposed you would. And I took
the liberty of making two?oh, privately, of course. I hope you’ll find
my writing fairly legible.” He drew two folded sheets from his
note-case, and offered one to Campton.

“Oh, thank you.” The two men grasped hands through the fog.

Mr. Brant turned to continue his round, and Campton went up to the
whitewashed cell in which he was lodged. Screening his candle to keep
the least light from leaking through the shutters, he re-read the story
of George’s wounding, copied out in the cramped tremulous writing of a
man who never took pen in hand but to sign a daily batch of typed
letters. The “hand-made” copy of a letter by Mr. Brant represented
something like the pious toil expended by a monkish scribe on the page
of a missal; and Campton was moved by the little man’s devotion.

As for the letter, Campton had no sooner begun to re-read it than he
entirely forgot that it was a message of love, addressed at George’s
request to Mrs. Talkett, and saw in it only the record of his son’s
bravery. And for the first time he understood that from the moment of
George’s wounding until now he had never really thought of him in
relation to the war, never thought of his judgment on the war, of all
the unknown emotions, resolves and actions which had drawn him so many
months ago from his safe shelter in the Argonne.

These things Campton, unconsciously, had put out of his mind, or rather
had lost out of his mind, from the moment when he had heard of George’s
wounding. By-and-bye, he knew, the sense of them, and of the questions
they raised, would come back and possess him; but meanwhile, emptied of
all else, he brimmed with the mere fact of George’s bodily presence,
with the physical signs of him, his weakness, his temperature, the pain
in his arm, the oppression on his lung, all the daily insistent details
involved in coaxing him slowly back to life.

The father could bear no more; he put the letter away, as a man might
put away something of which his heart was too full to measure it.
Later?yes; now, all he knew was that his son was alive.

                  *       *       *       *       *

But the hour of Campton’s entering into glory came when, two or three
days later, George asked with a sudden smile: “When I exchanged
regiments I did what you’d always hoped I would, eh, Dad?”

It was the first allusion, on the part of either, to the mystery of
George’s transit from the Argonne to the front. At Doullens he had been
too weak to be questioned, and as he grew stronger, and entered upon the
successive stages of his convalescence, he gave the impression of having
travelled far beyond such matters, and of living his real life in some
inconceivable region from which, with that new smile of his, he
continued to look down unseeingly on his parents. “It’s exactly as if he
were dead,” the father thought. “And if he were, he might go on watching
us with just such a smile.”

And then, one morning as they were taking a few steps on a sunny
terrace, Campton had felt the pressure of the boy’s sound arm, and
caught the old George in his look.

“I ... good Lord ... at any rate I’m glad you felt sure of me,” Campton
could only stammer in reply.

George laughed. “Well?rather!”

There was a long silence full of sea-murmurs, too drowsy and indolent,
for once, to simulate the horror of the guns.

“I?I only wish you’d felt you could trust me about it from the first, as
you did Adele and Boylston,” the father continued.

“But, my dear fellow, I did feel it! I swear I did! Only, you see, there
was mother. I thought it all over, and decided it would be easier for
you both if I said nothing. And, after all, I’m glad now that I
didn’t?that is, if you really do understand.”

“Yes; I understand.”

“That’s jolly.” George’s eyes turned from his and rested with a joyful
gravity on the little round-faced Sister who hurried up to say that he’d
been out long enough. Campton often caught him fixing this look of
serene benevolence on the people who were gradually repeopling his
world, a look which seemed to say that they were new to him, yet dimly
familiar. He was like a traveller returning after incommunicable
adventures to the place where he had lived as a child; and, as happens
with such wanderers, the trivial and insignificant things, the things a
newcomer would not have noticed, seemed often to interest him most of
all.

He said nothing more about himself, but with the look of recovered
humanness which made him more lovable if less remotely beautiful, began
to question his father.

“Boylston wrote that you’d begun to paint again. I’m glad.”

“Oh, I only took it up for a while last spring.”

“Portraits?”

“A few. But I chucked it. I couldn’t stand the atmosphere.”

“What atmosphere?”

“Of people who could want to be painted at such a time. People who
wanted to ‘secure a Campton.’ Oh, and then the dealers?God!”

George seemed unimpressed. “After all, life’s got to go on.”

“Yes?that’s what they say! And the only result is to make me doubt if
_theirs_ has.”

His son laughed, and then threw off: “You did Mrs. Talkett?”

“Yes,” Campton snapped, off his guard.

“She’s a pretty creature,” said George; and at that moment his eyes,
resting again on the little nurse, who was waiting at his door with a
cup of cocoa, lit up with celestial gratitude.

“The _communique’s_ good to-day,” she cried; and he smiled at her
boyishly. The war was beginning to interest him again: Campton was sure
that every moment he could spare from that unimaginable region which his
blue eyes guarded like a sword was spent among his comrades at the
front.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As the day approached for the return to Paris, Campton began to
penetrate more deeply into the meaning of George’s remoteness. He
himself, he discovered, had been all unawares in a far country, a
country guarded by a winged sentry, as the old hymn had it: the region
of silent incessant communion with his son. Just they two: everything
else effaced; not discarded, destroyed, not disregarded even, but
blotted out by a soft silver haze, as the brown slopes and distances
were, on certain days, from the windows of the seaward-gazing hospital.

It was not that Campton had been unconscious of the presence of other
suffering about them. As George grew stronger, and took his first steps
in the wards, he and his father were inevitably brought into contact
with the life of the hospital. George had even found a few friends, and
two or three regimental comrades, among the officers perpetually coming
and going, or enduring the long weeks of agony which led up to the end.
But that was only toward the close of their sojourn, when George was
about to yield his place to others, and be taken to Paris for the
re-education of his shattered arm. And by that time the weeks of
solitary communion had left such an imprint on Campton that, once the
hospital was behind him, and no more than a phase of memory, it became
to him as one of its own sea-mists, in which he and his son might have
been peacefully shut away together from all the rest of the world.




                                 XXVIII


“Preparedness!” cried Boylston in an exultant crow.

His round brown face with its curly crest and peering half-blind eyes
beamed at Campton in the old way across the desk of the Palais Royal
office; and from the corner where she had sunk down on one of the
broken-springed divans, Adele Anthony echoed: “Preparedness!”

It was the first time that Campton had heard the word; but the sense of
it had been in the air ever since he and George had got back to Paris.
He remembered, on the very day of their arrival, noticing something
different in both Boylston and Miss Anthony; and the change had shown
itself in the same way: both seemed more vivid yet more remote. It had
struck Campton in the moment of first meeting them, in the Paris
hospital near the Bois de Boulogne?Fortin-Lescluze’s old Nursing-Home
transformed into a House of Re-education?to which George had been taken.
In the little cell crowded with flowers?almost too many flowers, his
father thought, for the patient’s aching head and tired eyes?Campton,
watching the entrance of the two visitors, the first to be admitted
after Julia and Mr. Brant, had instantly remarked the air they had of
sharing something so secret and important that their joy at seeing
George seemed only the overflow of another deeper joy.

Their look had just such a vividness as George’s own; as their glances
crossed, Campton saw the same light in the eyes of all three. And now, a
few weeks later, the clue to it came to him in Boylston’s new word.
_Preparedness!_ America, it appeared, had caught it up from east to
west, in that sudden incalculable way she had of flinging herself on a
new idea; from a little group of discerning spirits the contagion had
spread like a prairie fire, sweeping away all the other catchwords of
the hour, devouring them in one great blaze of wrath and enthusiasm.
America meant to be prepared! First had come the creation of the
training camp at Plattsburg, for which, after long delays and much
difficulty, permission had been wrung from a reluctant government; then,
as candidates flocked to it, as the whole young manhood of the Eastern
States rose to the call, other camps, rapidly planned, were springing up
at Fort Oglethorpe in Georgia, at Fort Sheridan in Illinois, at The
Presidio in California; for the idea was spreading through the West, and
the torch kindled beside the Atlantic seaboard already flashed its light
on the Pacific.

For hours at a time Campton heard Boylston talking about these training
camps with the young Americans who helped him in his work, or dropped in
to seek his counsel. More than ever, now, he was an authority and an
oracle to these stray youths who were expending their enthusiasm for
France in the humblest of philanthropic drudgery: students of the Beaux
Arts or the University, or young men of leisure discouraged by the
indifference of their country and the dilatoriness of their government,
and fired by the desire to take part in a struggle in which they had
instantly felt their own country to be involved in spite of geographical
distance.

None of these young men had heard Benny Upsher’s imperious call to be
“in it” from the first, no matter how or at what cost. They were of the
kind to wait for a lead?and now Boylston was giving it to them with his
passionate variations on the great theme of Preparedness. George,
meanwhile, lay there in his bed and smiled; and now and then Boylston
brought one or two of the more privileged candidates to see him. One day
Campton found young Louis Dastrey there, worn and haggard after a bad
wound, and preparing to leave for America as instructor in one of the
new camps. That seemed to bring the movement closer than ever, to bring
it into their very lives. The thought flashed through Campton: “When
George is up, we’ll get him sent out too”; and once again a delicious
sense of security crept through him.

George, as yet, was only sitting up for a few hours a day; the wound in
the lung was slow in healing, and his fractured arm in recovering its
flexibility. But in another fortnight he was to leave the hospital and
complete his convalescence at his mother’s.

The thought was bitter to Campton; he had had all kinds of wild plans?of
taking George to the Crillon, or hiring an apartment for him, or even
camping with him at the studio. But George had smiled all this away. He
meant to return to the Avenue Marigny, where he always stayed when he
came to Paris, and where it was natural that his mother should want him
now. Adele Anthony pointed out to Campton how natural it was, one day as
he and she left the Palais Royal together. They were going to lunch at a
near-by restaurant, as they often did on leaving the office, and Campton
had begun to speak of George’s future arrangements. He would be well
enough to leave the hospital in another week, and then no doubt a
staff-job could be obtained for him in Paris?“with Brant’s pull, you
know,” Campton concluded, hardly aware that he had uttered the detested
phrase without even a tinge of irony. But Adele was aware, as he saw by
the faint pucker of her thin lips.

He shrugged her smile away indifferently. “Oh, well?hang it, yes!
Everything’s changed now, isn’t it? After what the boy’s been through I
consider that we’re more than justified in using Brant’s pull in his
favour?or anybody else’s.”

Miss Anthony nodded and unfolded her napkin.

“Well, then,” Campton continued his argument, “as he’s likely to be in
Paris now till the war is over?which means some time next year, they all
say?why shouldn’t I take a jolly apartment somewhere for the two of us?
Those pictures I did last spring brought me in a lot of money, and
there’s no reason??” His face lit up. “Servants, you say? Why, my poor
Mariette may be back from Lille any time now. They tell me there’s sure
to be a big push in the spring. They’re saving up for that all along the
line. Ask Dastrey ... ask....”

“You’d better let George go to his mother,” said Miss Anthony concisely.

“Why?”

“Because it’s natural?it’s human. _You’re_ not always, you know,” she
added with another pucker.

“Not human?”

“I don’t mean that you’re inhuman. But you see things differently.”

“I don’t want to see anything but one; and that’s my own son. How shall
I ever see George if he’s at the Avenue Marigny?”

“He’ll come to you.”

“Yes?when he’s not at Mrs. Talkett’s!”

Miss Anthony frowned. The subject had been touched upon between them
soon after Campton’s return, but Miss Anthony had little light to throw
on it: George had been as mute with her as with every one else, and she
knew Mrs. Talkett but slightly, and seldom saw her. Yet Campton
perceived that she could not hear the young woman named without an
involuntary contraction of her brows.

“I wish I liked her!” she murmured.

“Mrs. Talkett?”

“Yes?I should think better of myself if I did. And it might be useful.
But I can’t?I can’t!”

Campton said within himself: “Oh, women??!”

For his own resentment had died out long ago. He could think of the
affair now as one of hundreds such as happen to young men; he was even
conscious of regarding it, in some unlit secret fold of himself, as a
probable guarantee of George’s wanting to remain in Paris, another
subterranean way of keeping him, should such be needed. Perhaps that was
what Miss Anthony meant by saying that her liking Mrs. Talkett might be
“useful.”

“Why shouldn’t he be with me?” the father persisted. “He and I were
going off together when the war begun. I was defrauded of that?why
shouldn’t I have him now?”

Miss Anthony smiled. “Well, for one thing, because of that very ‘pull’
you were speaking of.”

“Oh, the Brants, the Brants!” Campton glanced impatiently at the
bill-of-fare, grumbled: “_Dejeuner du jour_, I suppose?” and went on:
“Yes; I might have known it?he belongs to them. From the minute we got
back, and I saw them at the station, with their motor waiting, and
everything arranged as only money can arrange it, I knew I’d lost my boy
again.” He stared moodily before him. “And yet if the war hadn’t come I
should have got him back?I almost had.”

His companion still smiled, a little wistfully. She leaned over and laid
her hand on his, under cover of the bill-of-fare. “You did get him back,
John, forever and always, the day he exchanged into the infantry. Isn’t
that enough?”

Campton answered her smile. “You gallant old chap, you!” he said; and
they began to lunch.

                  *       *       *       *       *

George was able to be up now, able to drive out, and to see more people;
and Campton was not surprised, on approaching his door a day or two
later, to hear several voices in animated argument.

The voices (and this did surprise him) were all men’s. In one he
recognized Boylston’s deep round notes; but the answering voice, flat,
toneless and yet eager, puzzled him with a sense of something familiar
but forgotten. He opened the door, and saw, at the tea-tray between
George and Boylston, the smoothly-brushed figure of Roger Talkett.

Campton had not seen Mrs. Talkett’s husband for months, and in the
interval so much had happened that the young man, always somewhat
faintly-drawn, had become as dim as a daguerreotype held at the wrong
angle.

The painter hung back, slightly embarrassed; but Mr. Talkett did not
seem in the least disturbed by his appearance, or by the fact of himself
being where he was. It was evident that, on whatever terms George might
be with his wife, Mr. Talkett was determined to shed on him the same
impartial beam as on all her other visitors.

His eye-glasses glinted blandly up at Campton. “Now I daresay I _am_
subversive,” he began, going on with what he had been saying, but in a
tone intended to include the newcomer. “I don’t say I’m not. We _are_ a
subversive lot at home, all of us?you must have noticed that, haven’t
you, Mr. Campton?”

Boylston emitted a faint growl. “What’s that got to do with it?” he
asked.

Mr. Talkett’s glasses slanted in his direction. “Why?everything!
Resistance to the herd-instinct (to borrow one of my wife’s expressions)
is really innate in me. And the idea of giving in now, of sacrificing my
convictions, just because of all this deafening noise about America’s
danger and America’s duties?well, _no_,” said Mr. Talkett, straightening
his glasses, “Philistinism won’t go down with me, in whatever form it
tries to disguise itself.” Instinctively, he stretched a neat hand
toward the teacups, as if he had been rearranging the furniture at one
of his wife’s parties.

“But?but?but??” Boylston stuttered, red with rage.

George burst into a laugh. He seemed to take a boyish amusement in the
dispute. “Tea, father?” he suggested, reaching across the tray for a
cigarette.

Talkett jerked himself to his feet. “Take my chair, now do, Mr. Campton.
You’ll be more comfortable. Here, let me shake up this cushion for
you??” (“_Cushion!_” Boylston interjected scornfully.) “A light, George?
Now don’t move!?I don’t say, of course, old chap,” Talkett continued, as
he held the match deferentially to George’s cigarette, “that this sort
of talk would be safe?or advisable?just now in public; subversive talk
never is. But when two or three of the Elect are gathered together?well,
your father sees my point, I know. The Hero,” he nodded at George, “has
his job, and the Artist,” with a slant at Campton, “his. In Germany, for
instance, as we’re beginning to find out, the creative minds, the
Intelligentsia (to use another of my wife’s expressions), have been
carefully protected from the beginning, given jobs, vitally important
jobs of course, but where their lives were not exposed. The country
needs them too much in other ways; they would probably be wretched
fighters, and they’re of colossal service in their own line. Whereas in
France and England??” he suddenly seemed to see his chance??“Well, look
here, Mr. Campton, I appeal to you, I appeal to the great creative
Artist: in any country but France and England, would a fellow of
George’s brains have been _allowed_, even at this stage of the war, to
chuck an important staff job, requiring intellect, tact and _savoir
faire_, and try to get himself killed like any unbaked boy?like your
poor cousin Benny Upsher, for instance? Would he?”

“Yes?in America!” shouted Boylston; and Mr. Talkett’s tallowy cheeks
turned pink.

“George knows how I feel about these things,” he stammered.

George still laughed in his remote impartial way, and Boylston asked
with a grin: “Why don’t you get yourself naturalized?a neutral?”

Mr. Talkett’s pinkness deepened. “I have lived too much among Artists??”
he began; and George interrupted gaily: “There’s a lot to be said on
Talkett’s side too. Going, Roger? Well, I shall be able to look in on
you now in a few days. Remember me to Madge. Goodbye.”

Boylston rose also, and Campton remained alone with his son.

“Remember me to Madge!” That was the way in which the modern young man
spoke of his beloved to his beloved’s proprietor. There had not been a
shadow of constraint in George’s tone; and now, glancing at the door
which had closed on Mr. Talkett, he merely said, as if apostrophizing
the latter’s neat back: “Poor devil! He’s torn to pieces with it.”

“With what?” asked Campton, startled.

“Why, with Boylston’s Preparedness. Wanting to do the proper thing?and
never before having had to decide between anything more vital than
straight or turned-down collars. It’s playing the very deuce with him.”

His eyes grew thoughtful. Was he going to pronounce Mrs. Talkett’s
name?at last? But no; he wandered back to her husband. “Poor little ass!
Of course he’ll decide against.” He shrugged his shoulders. “And
Boylston’s just as badly torn in the other direction.”

“Boylston?”

“Yes. Knowing that he wouldn’t be taken himself, on account of his bad
heart and his blind eyes, and wondering if, in spite of his
disabilities, he’s got the right to preach to all these young chaps here
who hang on his words like the gospel. One of them taunted him with it
the other day.”

“The cur!”

“Yes. And ever since, of course, Boylston’s been twice as fierce, and
overworking himself to calm his frenzy. The men who can’t go are all
like that, when they know it’s their proper work. It isn’t everybody’s
billet out there?I’ve learnt that since I’ve had a look at it?but it
would be Boylston’s if he had the health, and he knows it, and that’s
what drives him wild.” George looked at his father with a smile. “You
don’t know how I thank my stars that there weren’t any ‘problems’ for
me, but just a plain job that picked me up by the collar, and dropped me
down where I belonged.” He reached for another cigarette. “Old Adele’s
coming presently. Do you suppose we could rake up some fresh tea?” he
asked.




                                  XXIX


Coming out of the unlit rainy March night, it was agreeable but almost
startling to Campton to enter Mrs. Talkett’s drawing-room. In the
softness of shaded lamplight, against curtains closely drawn, young
women dressed with extravagant elegance chatted with much-decorated
officers in the new “horizon” uniform, with here and there among them an
elderly civilian head, such as Harvey Mayhew’s silvery thatch and the
square rapacious skull of the newly-knighted patriot, Sir Cyril
Jorgenstein.

Campton had gone to Mrs. Talkett’s that afternoon because she had lent
her apartment to “The Friends of French Art,” who were giving a concert
organized by Miss Anthony and Mlle. Davril, with Mme. de Dolmetsch’s
pianist as their leading performer. It would have been ungracious to
deprive the indefatigable group of the lustre they fancied Campton’s
presence would confer; and he was not altogether sorry to be there. He
knew that George had promised Miss Anthony to come; and he wanted to see
his son with Mrs. Talkett.

An abyss seemed to divide this careless throng of people, so obviously
assembled for their own pleasure, the women to show their clothes, the
men to admire them, from the worn preoccupied audiences of the first
war-charity entertainments. The war still raged; wild hopes had given
way to dogged resignation; each day added to the sum of public anguish
and private woe. But the strain had been too long, the tragedy too
awful. The idle and the useless had reached their emotional limit, and
once more they dressed and painted, smiled, gossiped, flirted as though
the long agony were over.

On a sofa stacked with orange-velvet cushions Mme. de Dolmetsch reclined
in a sort of serpent-coil of flexible grey-green hung with strange
amulets. Her eyes, in which fabulous islands seemed to dream, were fixed
on the bushy-haired young man at the piano. Close by, upright and
tight-waisted, sat the Marquise de Tranlay, her mourning veil thrown
back from a helmetlike hat. She had planted herself in a Louis Philippe
armchair, as if appealing to its sturdy frame to protect her from the
anarchy of Mrs. Talkett’s furniture; and beside her was the daughter for
whose sake she had doubtless come?a frowning beauty who, in spite of her
dowdy dress and ugly boots, somehow declared herself as having already
broken away from the maternal tradition.

Mme. de Tranlay’s presence in that drawing-room was characteristic
enough. It meant?how often one heard it nowadays!?that mothers had to
take their daughters wherever there was a chance of their meeting young
men, and that such chances were found only in the few “foreign” houses
where, discreetly, almost clandestinely, entertaining had been resumed.
You had to take them there, Mme. de Tranlay’s look seemed to say,
because they had to be married (the sooner the better in these wild
times, with all the old barriers down), and because the young men were
growing so tragically few, and the competition was so fierce, and
because in such emergencies a French mother, whose first thought is
always for her children, must learn to accept, even to seek,
propinquities from which her inmost soul, and all the ancestral souls
within her, would normally recoil.

Campton remembered her gallant attitude on the day when, under her fresh
crape, she had rebuked Mrs. Brant’s despondency. “But how she hates it
here?how she must loathe sitting next to that woman!” he thought; and
just then he saw her turn toward Mme. de Dolmetsch with a stiff bend
from the waist, and heard her say in her most conciliatory tone: “Your
great friend, the rich American, _chere Madame_, the benefactor of
France?we should so like to thank him, Claire and I, for all he is doing
for our country.”

Beckoned to by Mme. de Dolmetsch, Mr. Mayhew, all pink and silver and
prominent pearl scarf-pin, bowed before the Tranlay ladies, while the
Marquise deeply murmured: “We are grateful?we shall not forget?” and
Mademoiselle de Tranlay, holding him with her rich gaze, added in fluent
English: “Mamma hopes you’ll come to tea on Sunday?with no one but my
uncle the Duc de Montlhery?so that we may thank you better than we can
here.”

“Great women?great women!” Campton mused. He was still watching Mme. de
Tranlay’s dauntless mask when her glance deserted the gratified Mayhew
to seize on a younger figure. It was that of George, who had just
entered. Mme. de Tranlay, with a quick turn, caught Campton’s eye,
greeted him with her trenchant cordiality, and asked, in a voice like
the pounce of talons: “The young officer who has the Legion of
Honour?the one you just nodded to?with reddish hair and his left arm in
a sling? French, I suppose, from his uniform; and yet??? Yes, talking to
Mrs. Talkett. Can you tell me???”

“My son,” said Campton with satisfaction.

The effect was instantaneous, though Mme. de Tranlay kept her radiant
steadiness. “How charming?charming?charming!” And, after a proper
interval: “But, Claire, my child, we’ve not yet spoken to Mrs. Brant,
whom I see over there.” And she steered her daughter swiftly toward
Julia.

Campton’s eyes returned to his son. George was still with Mrs. Talkett,
but they had only had time for a word or two before she was called away
to seat an important dowager. In that moment, however, the father noted
many things. George, as usual nowadays, kept his air of guarded
kindliness, though the blue of his eyes grew deeper; but Mrs. Talkett
seemed bathed in light. It was such a self-revelation that Campton’s
curiosity was lost in the artist’s abstract joy. “If I could have
painted her like that!” he thought, reminded of having caught Mme. de
Dolmetsch transfigured by fear for her lover; but an instant later he
remembered. “Poor little thing!” he murmured. Mrs. Talkett turned her
head, as if his thought had reached her. “Oh, yes?oh, yes; come and let
me tell you all about it,” her eyes entreated him. But Mayhew and Sir
Cyril Jorgenstein were between them.

“George!” Mrs. Brant called; and across the intervening groups Campton
saw his son bowing to the Marquise de Tranlay.

Mme. de Dolmetsch jumped up, her bracelets jangling like a prompter’s
call. “Silence!” she cried. The ladies squeezed into their seats, the
men resigned themselves to door-posts and window-embrasures, and the
pianist attacked Stravinsky....

“Dancing?” Campton heard his hostess answering some one. “N?no: not
_quite_ yet, I think. Though in London, already ... oh, just for the
officers on leave, of course. Poor darlings?why shouldn’t they? But
to-day, you see, it’s for a charity.” Her smile appealed to her hearer
to acknowledge the distinction.

The music was over, and scanning the groups at the tea-tables, Campton
saw Adele and Mlle. Davril squeezed away in the remotest corner of the
room. He took a chair at their table, and Boylston presently blinked his
way to them through the crowd.

They seemed, all four, more like unauthorized intruders on the brilliant
scene than its laborious organizers. The entertainment, escaping from
their control, had speedily reverted to its true purpose of feeding and
amusing a crowd of bored and restless people; and the little group
recognized the fact, and joked over it in their different ways. But
Mlle. Davril was happy at the sale of tickets, which must have been
immense to judge from the crowd (spying about the entrance, she had seen
furious fine ladies turn away ticketless); and Adele Anthony was
exhilarated by the nearness of people she did not know, or wish to know,
but with whose names and private histories she was minutely and
passionately familiar.

“That’s the old Duchesse de Murols with Mrs. Talkett?there, she’s put
her at the Beausite’s table! Well, of all places! Ah, but you’re all too
young to know about Beausite’s early history. And now, of course, it
makes no earthly difference to anybody. But there must be times when
Mme. Beausite remembers, and grins. Now that she’s begun to rouge again
she looks twenty years younger than the Duchess.??Ah,” she broke off,
abruptly signing to Campton.

He followed her glance to a table at which Julia Brant was seating
herself with the Tranlay ladies and George. Mayhew joined them, nobly
deferential, and the elder ladies lent him their intensest attention,
isolating George with the young girl.

“H’m,” Adele murmured, “not such a bad thing! They say the girl will
have half of old Montlhery’s money?he’s her mother’s uncle. And she’s
heaps handsomer than the other?not that _that_ seems to count any more!”

Campton shrugged the subject away. Yes; it would be a good thing if
George could be drawn from what his mother (with a retrospective
pinching of the lips) called his “wretched infatuation.” But the idea
that the boy might be coaxed into a marriage?and a rich marriage?by the
Brants, was even more distasteful to Campton. If he really loved Madge
Talkett better stick to her than let himself be cajoled away for such
reasons.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As the second part of the programme began, Campton and Boylston slipped
out together. Campton was oppressed and disturbed. “It’s queer,” he
said, taking Boylston’s arm to steer him through the dense darkness of
the streets; “all these people who’ve forgotten the war have suddenly
made me remember it.”

Boylston laughed. “Yes, I know.” He seemed preoccupied and
communicative, and the painter fancied he was going to lead the talk, as
usual, to Preparedness and America’s intervention; but after a pause he
said: “You haven’t been much at the office lately??”

“No,” Campton interrupted. “I’ve shirked abominably since George got
back. But now that he’s gone to the Brants’ you’ll see??”

“Oh, I didn’t mean it as a reproach, sir! How could you think it? We’re
running smoothly enough, as far as organization goes. That’s not what
bothers me??”

“You’re bothered?”

Yes; he was?and so, he added, was Miss Anthony. The trouble was, he went
on to explain, that Mr. Mayhew, after months of total indifference
(except when asked to “represent” them on official platforms) had
developed a disquieting interest in “The Friends of French Art.” He had
brought them, in the beginning, a certain amount of money (none of which
came out of his own pocket), and in consequence had been imprudently put
on the Financial Committee, so that he had a voice in the disposal of
funds, though till lately he had never made it heard. But now,
apparently, “Atrocities” were losing their novelty, and he was disposed
to transfer his whole attention to “The Friends of French Art,” with
results which seemed incomprehensibly disturbing to Boylston, until he
let drop the name of Mme. de Dolmetsch. Campton exclaimed at it.

“Well?yes. You must have noticed that she and Mr. Mayhew have been
getting pretty chummy. You see, he’s done such a lot of talking that
people think he’s at least an Oil King; and Mme. de Dolmetsch is
dazzled. But she’s got her musical prodigy to provide for??” and
Boylston outlined the situation which his astuteness had detected while
it developed unperceived under Campton’s dreaming eyes. Mr. Mayhew was
attending all their meetings now, finding fault, criticizing, asking to
have the accounts investigated, though they had always been audited at
regular intervals by expert accountants; and all this zeal originated in
the desire to put Mme. de Dolmetsch in Miss Anthony’s place, on the plea
that her greater social experience, her gift of attracting and
interesting, would bring in immense sums of money?whereas, Boylston
grimly hinted, they already had a large balance in the bank, and it was
with an eye to that balance that Mme. de Dolmetsch was forcing Mayhew to
press her claim.

“You see, sir, Mr. Mayhew never turns out to be as liberal as they
expect when they first hear him talk; and though Mme. de Dolmetsch has
him in her noose she’s not getting what she wants?by a long way. And so
they’ve cooked this up between them?she and Mme. Beausite?without his
actually knowing what they’re after.”

Campton stopped short, releasing Boylston’s arm. “But what you suggest
is abominable,” he exclaimed.

“Yes. I know it.” But the young man’s voice remained steady. “Well, I
wish you’d come to our meetings, now you’re back.”

“I will?I will! But I’m no earthly use on financial questions. You’re
much stronger there.”

He felt Boylston’s grin through the darkness. “Oh, they’ll have me out
too before long.”

“You? Nonsense! What do you mean?”

“I mean that lots of people are beginning to speculate in war
charities?oh, in all sorts of ways. Sometimes I’m sick to the point of
chucking it all. But Miss Anthony keeps me going.”

“Ah, she would!” Campton agreed.

As he walked home his mind was burdened with Boylston’s warning. It was
not merely the affair itself, but all it symbolized, that made his gorge
rise, made him, as Boylston said, sick to the point of wanting to chuck
it all?to chuck everything connected with this hideous world that was
dancing and flirting and money-making on the great red mounds of dead.
He grinned at the thought that he had once believed in the regenerative
power of war?the salutary shock of great moral and social upheavals. Yet
he _had_ believed in it, and never more intensely than at George’s
bedside at Doullens, in that air so cleansed by passion and pain that
mere living seemed a meaningless gesture compared to the chosen
surrender of life. But in the Paris to which he had returned after
barely four months of absence the instinct of self-preservation seemed
to have wiped all meaning from such words. Poor fatuous Mayhew dancing
to Mme. de Dolmetsch’s piping, Jorgenstein sinking under the weight of
his international honours, Mme. de Tranlay intriguing to push her
daughter in such society, and Julia placidly abetting her?Campton hardly
knew from which of these sorry visions he turned with a completer
loathing....

There were still the others, to be sure, the huge obscure majority; out
there in the night, the millions giving their lives for this handful of
trivial puppets, and here in Paris, and everywhere, in every country,
men and women toiling unweariedly to help and heal; but in Mrs.
Talkett’s drawing-room both fighters and toilers seemed to count as
little in relation to the merrymakers as Miss Anthony and Mlle. Davril
in relation to the brilliant people who had crowded their table into the
obscurest corner of the room.




                                  XXX


These thoughts continued to weigh on Campton; to shake them off he
decided, with one of his habitual quick jerks of resolution, to get back
to work. He knew that George would approve, and would perhaps be oftener
with him if he had something interesting on his easel. Sir Cyril
Jorgenstein had suggested that he would like to have his portrait
finished?with the Legion of Honour added to his lapel, no doubt. And
Harvey Mayhew, rosy and embarrassed, had dropped in to hint that, if
Campton could find time to do a charcoal head?oh, just one of those
brilliant sketches of his?of the young musical genius in whose career
their friend Mme. de Dolmetsch was so much interested.... But Campton
had cut them both short. He was not working?he had no plans for the
present. And in truth he had not thought even of attempting a portrait
of George. The impulse had come to him, once, as he sat by the boy’s
bed; but the face was too incomprehensible. He should have to learn and
unlearn too many things first??

At last, one day, it occurred to him to make a study of Mme. Lebel. He
saw _her_ in charcoal: her simple unquestioning anguish had turned her
old face to sculpture. Campton set his canvas on the easel, and started
to shout for her down the stairs; but as he opened the door he found
himself face to face with Mrs. Talkett.

“Oh,” she began at once, in her breathless way, “you’re here? The old
woman downstairs wasn’t sure?and I couldn’t leave all this money with
her, could I?”

“Money? What money?” he echoed.

She was very simply dressed, and a veil, drooping low from her hat-brim,
gave to her over-eager face a shadowy youthful calm.

“I _may_ come in?” she questioned, almost timidly; and as Campton let
her pass she added: “The money from the concert, of course?heaps and
heaps of it! I’d no idea we’d made so much. And I wanted to give it to
you myself.”

She shook a bulging bag out of her immense muff, while Campton continued
to stare at her.

“I didn’t know you went out so early,” he finally stammered, trying to
push a newspaper over the disordered remains of his breakfast.

She lifted interrogative eyebrows. “That means that I’m in the way?”

“No. But why did you bring that money here?”

She looked surprised. “Why not? Aren’t you the head?the real head of the
committee? And wasn’t the concert given in my house?” Her eyes rested on
him with renewed timidity. “Is it?disagreeable to you to see me?” she
asked.

“Disagreeable? My dear child, no.” He paused, increasingly embarrassed.
What did she expect him to say next? To thank her for having sent him
the orderly’s letter? It seemed to him impossible to plunge into the
subject uninvited. Surely it was for her to give him the opening, if she
wished to.

“Well, no!” she broke out. “I’ve never once pretended to you, have I?
The money’s a pretext. I wanted to see you?here, alone, with no one to
disturb us.”

Campton felt a confused stirring of relief and fear. All his old dread
of scenes, commotions, disturbing emergencies?of anything that should
upset his perpetually vibrating balance?was blent with the passionate
desire to hear what his visitor had to say.

“You?it was good of you to think of sending us that letter,” he
faltered.

She frowned in her anxious way and looked away from him. “Afterward I
was afraid you’d be angry.”

“Angry? How could I?” He groped for a word. “Surprised?yes. I knew
nothing ... nothing about you and....”

“Not even that it was I who bought the sketch of him?the one that Leonce
Black sold for you last year?”

The blood rushed to Campton’s face. Suddenly he felt himself trapped and
betrayed. “You?_you_? You’ve got that sketch?” The thought was somehow
intolerable to him.

“Ah, now you _are_ angry,” Mrs. Talkett murmured.

“No, no; but I never imagined??”

“I know. That was what frightened me?your suspecting nothing.” She
glanced about her, dropped to a corner of the divan, and tossed off her
hat with the old familiar gesture. “Oh, can I talk to you?” she pleaded.

Campton nodded.

“I wish you’d light your pipe, then, and sit down too.” He reached for
his pipe, struck a match, and slowly seated himself. “You always smoke a
pipe in the morning, don’t you? _He_ told me that,” she went on; then
she paused again and drew a long anxious breath. “Oh, he’s so changed! I
feel as if I didn’t know him any longer?do _you_?”

Campton looked at her with deepening wonder. This was more surprising
than discovering her to be the possessor of the picture; he had not
expected deep to call unto deep in their talk. “I’m not sure that I do,”
he confessed.

Her fidgeting eyes deepened and grew quieter. “Your saying so makes me
feel less lonely,” she sighed, half to herself. “But has he told you
nothing since he came back?really nothing?”

“Nothing. After all?how could he? I mean, without indiscretion?”

“Indiscretion? Oh??” She shrugged the word away with half a smile, as
though such considerations belonged to a prehistoric order of things.
“Then he hasn’t even told you that he wants me to get a divorce?”

“A divorce?” Campton exclaimed. He sat staring at her as if the weight
of his gaze might pin her down, keep her from fluttering away and
breaking up into luminous splinters. George wanted her to get a
divorce?wanted, therefore, to marry her! His passion went as deep for
her as that?too deep, Campton conjectured, for the poor little ephemeral
creature, who struck him as wriggling on it like a butterfly impaled.

“Please tell me,” he said at length; and suddenly, in short inconsequent
sentences, the confession poured from her.

George, it seemed, during the previous winter in New York, when they had
seen so much of each other, had been deeply attracted, had wanted
“everything,” and at once?and there had been moments of tension and
estrangement, when she had been held back by scruples she confessed she
no longer understood (inherited prejudices, she supposed), and when her
reluctance must have made her appear to be trifling, whereas, really it
was just that she couldn’t ... couldn’t.... So they had gone on for
several months, with the usual emotional ups-and-downs, till he had left
for Europe to join his father; and when they had parted she had given
him the half-promise that if they met abroad during the summer she would
perhaps ... after all....

Then came the war. George had been with her during those few last hours
in Paris, and had dined with her and her husband (had Campton forgiven
her?) the night before he was mobilised. And then, when he was gone, she
had understood that only timidity, vanity, the phantom barriers of old
terrors and traditions, had prevented her being to him all that he
wanted....

She broke off abruptly, put in a few conventional words about an
ill-assorted marriage, and never having been “really understood,” and
then, as if guessing that she was on the wrong tack, jumped up, walked
to the other end of the studio, and turned back to Campton with the
tears running down her ravaged face.

“And now?and now?he says he won’t have me!” she lamented.

“Won’t have you? But you tell me he wants you to be divorced.”

She nodded, wiped away the tears, and in so doing stole an unconscious
glance at the mirror above the divan. Then, seeing that the glance was
detected, she burst into a sort of sobbing laugh. “My nose gets so
dreadfully red when I cry,” she stammered.

Campton took no notice, and she went on: “A divorce? Yes. And unless I
do?unless I agree to marry him?we’re never to be anything but friends.”

“That’s what he says?”

“Yes. Oh, we’ve been all in and out of it a hundred times.”

She pulled out a gold-mesh bag and furtively restored her complexion, as
Mrs. Brant had once done in the same place.

Campton sat still, considering. He had let his pipe go out. Nothing
could have been farther from the revelation he had expected, and his own
perplexity was hardly less great than his visitor’s. Certainly it was
not the way in which young men had behaved in his day?nor, evidently,
had it been George’s before the war.

Finally he made up his mind to put the question: “And Talkett?”

She burst out at once: “Ah, that’s what I say?it’s not so simple!”

“What isn’t?”

“Breaking up?all one’s life.” She paused with a deepening embarrassment.
“Of course Roger has made me utterly miserable?but then I know he really
hasn’t meant to.”

“Have you told George that?”

“Yes. But he says we must first of all be aboveboard. He says he sees
everything differently now. That’s what I mean when I say that I don’t
understand him. He says love’s not the same kind of feeling to him that
it was. There’s something of Meredith’s that he quotes?I wish I could
remember it?something about a mortal lease.”

“Good Lord,” Campton groaned, not so much at the hopelessness of the
case as at the hopelessness of quoting Meredith to her. After a while he
said abruptly: “You must forgive my asking: but things change
sometimes?they change imperceptibly. Do you think he’s as much in love
with you as ever?”

He had been half afraid of offending her: but she appeared to consider
the question impartially, and without a shadow of resentment. “Sometimes
I think more?because in the beginning it wasn’t meant to last. And
now?if he wants to marry me? Oh, I wish I knew what to do!”

Campton continued to ponder. “There’s one more question, since we’re
talking frankly: what does Talkett know of all this?”

She looked frightened. “Oh, nothing, nothing!”

“And you’ve no idea how he would take it?”

She examined the question with tortured eyebrows, and at length, to
Campton’s astonishment, brought out: “Magnificently??”

“He’d be generous, you mean? But it would go hard with him?”

“Oh, dreadfully, dreadfully!” She seemed to need the assurance to
restore her shaken self-approval.

Campton rose with a movement of pity and laid his hand on her shoulder.
“My dear child, if your husband cares for you, give up my son.”

Her face fell, and she drew back. “Oh, but you don’t understand?not in
the least! It’s not possible?it’s not moral??. You know I’m all for the
new morality. First of all, we must be true to self.” She paused, and
then broke out: “You tell me to give him up because you think he’s tired
of me. But he’s not?I know he’s not! It’s his new ideas that you don’t
understand, any more than I do. It’s the war that has changed him. He
says he wants only things that last?that are permanent?things that hold
a man fast. That sometimes he feels as if he were being swept away on a
flood, and were trying to catch at things?at anything?as he’s rushed
along under the waves.... He says he wants quiet, monotony ... to be
sure the same things will happen every day. When we go out together he
sometimes stands for a quarter of an hour and stares at the same
building, or at the Seine under the bridges. But he’s happy, I’m
sure.... I’ve never seen him happier ... only it’s in a way I can’t make
out....”

“Ah, my dear, if it comes to that?I’m not sure that I can. Not sure
enough to help you, I’m afraid.”

She looked at him, disappointed. “You won’t speak to him then?”

“Not unless he speaks to me.”

“Ah, he frightens you?just as he does me!”

She pulled her hat down on her troubled brow, gathered up her furs, and
took another sidelong peep at the glass. Then she turned toward the
door. On the threshold she paused and looked back at Campton. “Don’t you
see,” she cried, “that if I were to give George up he’d get himself sent
straight back to the front?”

Campton’s heart gave an angry leap; for a second he felt the impulse to
strike her, to catch her by the shoulders and bundle her out of the
room. With a great effort he controlled himself and opened the door.

“You don’t understand?you don’t understand!” she called back to him once
again from the landing.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Madge Talkett had asked him to speak to his son: he had refused, and she
had retaliated by planting that poisoned shaft in him. But what had
retaliation to do with it? She had probably spoken the simple truth, and
with the natural desire to enlighten him. If George wanted to marry her,
it must be (since human nature, though it might change its vocabulary,
kept its instincts), it must be that he was very much in love?and in
that case her refusal would in truth go hard with him, and it would be
natural that he should try to get himself sent away from Paris.... From
Paris, yes; but not necessarily to the front. After such wounds and such
honours he had only to choose; a staff-appointment could easily be got.
Or, no doubt, with his two languages, he might, if he preferred, have
himself sent on a military mission to America. With all this propaganda
talk, wasn’t he the very type of officer they wanted for the neutral
countries?

It was Campton’s dearest wish that George should stay where he was; he
knew his peace of mind would vanish the moment his son was out of sight.
But he suspected that George would soon weary of staff-work, or of any
form of soldiering at the rear, and try for the trenches if he left
Paris; whereas, in Paris, Madge Talkett might hold him?as she had meant
his father to see.

The first thing, then, was to make sure of a job at the War Office.

Campton turned and tossed like a sick man on the hard bed of his
problem. To plan, to scheme, to plot and circumvent?nothing was more
hateful to him, there was nothing in which he was less skilled. If only
he dared to consult Adele Anthony! But Adele was still incorrigibly
warlike, and her having been in George’s secret while his parents were
excluded from it left no doubt as to the side on which her influence
would bear. She loved the boy, Campton sometimes thought, even more
passionately than his mother did; but?how did the old song go??she loved
honour, or her queer conception of it, more. Ponder as he would, he
could not picture her, even now, lifting a finger to keep George back.

Campton struggled all the morning with these questions. After lunch he
pocketed Mrs. Talkett’s moneybag and carried it to the Palais Royal,
where he discovered Harvey Mayhew in confabulation with Mme. Beausite,
who still trailed her ineffectual beauty about the office. The painter
thought he detected a faint embarrassment in the glance with which they
both greeted him.

“Hallo, Campton! Looking for our good friend Boylston? He’s off duty
this afternoon, Mme. Beausite tells me; as he is pretty often in these
days, I’ve noticed,” Mr. Mayhew sardonically added. “In fact, the office
has rather been left to run itself lately?eh? Of course our good Miss
Anthony is absorbed with her refugees?gives us but a divided allegiance.
And Boylston?well, young men, young men! Of course it’s been a weary
pull for him. By the way, my dear fellow,” Mr. Mayhew continued, as
Campton appeared about to turn away, “I called at Mrs. Talkett’s just
now to ask for the money from the concert?a good round sum, I hear it
is?and she told me she’d given it to you. Have you brought it with you?
If so, Mme. Beausite here would take charge of it??”

Mme. Beausite turned her great resigned eyes on the painter. “Mr.
Campton knows I’m very careful. I will lock it up till his friend’s
return. Now that Mr. Boylston is so much away I very often have such
responsibilities.”

Campton’s eyes returned her glance; but he did not waver. “Thanks so
much; but as the sum is rather large it seems to me the bank’s the
proper place. Will you please tell Boylston I’ve deposited it?”

Mr. Mayhew’s benevolent pink turned to an angry red. For a moment
Campton thought he was about to say something foolish. But he merely
bent his head stiffly, muttered a vague phrase about “irregular
proceedings,” and returned to his seat by Mme. Beausite’s desk.

As for Campton, his words had decided his course: he would take the
money at once to Bullard and Brant’s and seize the occasion to see the
banker. Mr. Brant was the only person with whom, at this particular
juncture, he cared to talk of George.




                                  XXXI


Mr. Brant’s private office was as glitteringly neat as when Campton had
entered it for the first time, and seen the fatal telegram about Benny
Upsher marring the order of the desk.

Now he crossed the threshold with different feelings. To have Mr. Brant
look up and smile, to shake hands with him, accept one of his cigars,
and sink into one of the blue leather armchairs, seemed to be in the
natural order of things. He felt only the relief of finding himself with
the one person likely to understand.

“About George??” he began.

“Yes?” said Mr. Brant briskly. “It’s curious?I was just thinking of
looking you up. It’s his birthday next Tuesday, you know.”

“Oh??” said the father, slightly put off. He had not come to talk of
birthdays; nor did he need to be reminded of his son’s by Mr. Brant. He
concluded that Mr. Brant would be less easy to get on with in Paris than
at the front.

“And we thought of celebrating the day by a little party?a dinner, with
perhaps the smallest kind of a dance: or just bridge?yes, probably just
bridge,” the banker added tentatively. “Opinions differ as to the
suitability?it’s for his mother to decide. But of course no evening
clothes; and we hoped perhaps to persuade you. Our only object is to
amuse him?to divert his mind from this wretched entanglement.”

It was doubtful if Mr. Brant had ever before made so long a speech,
except perhaps at a board meeting; and then only when he read the annual
report. He turned pink and stared over Campton’s shoulder at the
panelled white wall, on which a false Reynolds hung.

Campton meditated. The blush was the blush of Mr. Brant, but the voice
was the voice of Julia. Still, it was probable that neither husband nor
wife was aware how far matters had gone with Mrs. Talkett.

“George is more involved than you think,” Campton said.

Mr. Brant looked startled.

“In what way?”

“He means to marry her. He insists on her getting a divorce.”

“A divorce? Good gracious,” murmured Mr. Brant. He turned over a jade
paper-cutter, trying its edge absently on his nail. “Does Julia???” he
began at length.

Campton shook his head. “No; I wanted to speak to you first.”

Mr. Brant gave his quick bow. He was evidently gratified, and the
sentiment stimulated his faculties, as it had when he found that Campton
no longer resented his presence at the hospital. His small effaced
features took on a businesslike sharpness, and he readjusted his
eye-glasses and straightened the paper-cutter, which he had put back on
the desk a fraction of an inch out of its habitual place.

“You had this from George?” he asked.

“No; from her. She’s been to see me. _She_ doesn’t want to divorce.
She’s in love with him; in her way, that is; but she’s frightened.”

“And that makes him the more eager?”

“The more determined, at any rate.”

Mr. Brant appeared to seize the distinction. “George can be very
determined.”

“Yes. I think his mother ought to be made to understand that all this
talk about a wretched entanglement isn’t likely to make him any less
so.”

Mr. Brant’s look seemed to say that making Julia understand had proved a
no less onerous task for his maturity than for Campton’s youth.

“If you don’t object?perhaps the matter might, for the present, continue
to be kept between you and me,” he suggested.

“Oh, by all means. What I want,” Campton pursued, “is to get him out of
this business altogether. They wouldn’t be happy?they couldn’t be. She’s
too much like??” He broke off, frightened at what he had been about to
say. “Too much,” he emended, “like the usual fool of a woman that every
boy of George’s age thinks he wants simply because he can’t get her.”

“And you say she came to you for advice?”

“She came to me to persuade him to give up the idea of a divorce.
Apparently she’s ready for anything short of that. It’s a queer
business. She seems sorry for Talkett in a way.”

Mr. Brant marked his sense of the weight of this by a succession of
attentive nods. He put his hands in his pockets, leaned back, and tilted
his dapper toes against the gold-trellised scrap-basket. The attitude
seemed to change the pale panelling of his background into a
glass-and-mahogany Wall Street office.

“Won’t he be satisfied with?er?all the rest, so to speak; since you say
she offers it?”

“No; he won’t. There’s the difficulty. It seems it’s the new view. The
way the young men feel since the war. He wants her for his wife. Nothing
less.”

“Ah, he respects her,” murmured Mr. Brant, impressed; and Campton
reflected that he had no doubt respected Julia.

“And what she wants is to get you to persuade him?to accept less?”

“Well?something of the sort.”

Mr. Brant sat up and dropped his heels to the floor. “Well,
then?_don’t_!” he snapped.

“Don’t???”

“Persuade her, on the contrary, to keep him hoping?to make him think she
means to marry him. Don’t you see?” Mr. Brant exclaimed, almost
impatiently. “Don’t you see that if she turns him down definitely he’ll
be scheming to get away, to get back to the front, the minute his leave
is over? Tell her that?appeal to her on that ground. Make her do it. She
will if she’s in love with him. And we can’t stop him from going
back?not one of us. He’s restless here already?I know that. Always
talking about his men, saying he’s got to get back to them. The only way
is to hold him by this girl. She’s the very influence we need!”

He threw it all out in sharp terse phrases, as a business man might try
to hammer facts about an investment into the bewildered brain of an
unpractical client. Campton felt the blood rising to his forehead, not
so much in anger at Mr. Brant as at the sense of his own inward
complicity.

“There’s no earthly reason why George should ever go back to the front,”
he said.

“None whatever. We can get him any staff-job he chooses. His mother’s
already got the half-promise of a post for him at the War Office. But
you’ll see, you’ll see! We can’t stop him. Did we before? There’s only
this woman who can do it!”

Campton looked over the banker’s head at the reflection of the false
Reynolds in the mirror. That any one should have been fool enough to pay
a big price for such a patent fraud seemed to him as incomprehensible as
his own present obtuseness seemed to the banker.

“You do see, don’t you?” argued Mr. Brant anxiously.

“Oh, I suppose so.” Campton slowly got to his feet. The adroit brushwork
of the forged picture fascinated him, and he went up to look at it more
closely. Mr. Brant pursued him with a gratified glance.

“Ah, you’re admiring my Reynolds. I paid a thumping price for it?but
that’s always my principle. Pay high, but get the best. It’s a better
investment.”

“Just so,” Campton assented dully. Mr. Brant seemed suddenly divided
from him by the whole width of the gulf between that daub on the wall
and a real Reynolds. They had nothing more to say to each other?nothing
whatever. “Well, goodbye.” He held out his hand.

“Think it over?think it over,” Mr. Brant called out after him as he
enfiladed the sumptuous offices, a medalled veteran holding back each
door.

It was not until Campton was back at Montmartre, and throwing off his
coat to get into his old studio clothes, that he felt in his pocket the
weight of the forgotten concert-money. It was too late in the day to
take it back to the bank, even if he had had the energy to retrace his
steps; and he decided to hand the bag over to Boylston, with whom he was
dining that night to meet the elder Dastrey, home on a brief leave from
his ambulance.

                  *       *       *       *       *

“Think it over!” Mr. Brant’s adjuration continued to echo in Campton’s
ears. As if he needed to be told to think it over! Once again the
war-worn world had vanished from his mind, and he saw only George,
himself and George, George and safety, George and peace. They blamed
women who were cowards about their husbands, mistresses who schemed to
protect their lovers! Well?he was as bad as any one of them, if it came
to that. His son had bought his freedom, had once offered his life and
nearly lost it. Brant was right: at all costs they must keep him from
rushing back into that hell.

That Mrs. Talkett should be the means of securing his safety was bitter
enough. This trivial barren creature to be his all?it seemed the parody
of Campton’s own youth! And Julia, after all, had been only a girl when
he had met her, inexperienced and still malleable. A man less absorbed
in his art, less oblivious of the daily material details of life, might
conceivably have made something of her. But this little creature, with
her farrago of false ideas, her vanity, her restlessness, her
undisguised desire to keep George and yet not lose her world, had
probably reached the term of her development, and would trip on through
an eternal infancy of fads and frenzies.

Luckily, as Mr. Brant said, they could use her for the time; use her
better, no doubt, than had she been a more finely tempered instrument.
Campton was still pondering on these things as he set out for the
restaurant where he had agreed to meet Boylston and Dastrey. At the foot
of his own stairs he was surprised to run against Boylston under the
porte-cochere. They gave each other a quick questioning look, as men did
when they encountered each other unexpectedly in those days.

“Anything up? Oh, the money?you’ve come for the money?” Campton
remembered that he had left the bag upstairs.

“The money? Haven’t you heard? Louis Dastrey’s killed,” said Boylston.

They stood side by side in the doorway, while Campton’s darkened mind
struggled anew with the mystery of fate. Almost every day now the same
readjustment had to be gone through: the cowering averted mind dragged
upward and forced to visualize a new gap in the ranks, and summon the
remaining familiar figures to fill it up and blot it out. And to-day
this cruel gymnastic was to be performed for George’s best friend, the
elder Dastrey’s sole stake in life! Only a few days ago the lad had
passed through Paris, just back from America, and in haste to rejoin his
regiment; alive and eager, throbbing with ideas, with courage, mirth and
irony?the very material France needed to rebuild her ruins and beget her
sons! And now, struck down as George had been?not to rise like
George....

Once more the inner voice in Campton questioned distinctly: “Could you
bear it?” and again he answered: “Less than ever!”

Aloud he asked: “Paul?”

“Oh, he went off at once. To break the news to Louis’ mother in the
country.”

“The boy was all Paul had left.”

“Yes.”

“What difference would it have made in the war, if he’d just stayed on
at his job in America?”

Boylston did not answer, and the two stood silent, looking out
unseeingly at the black empty street. There was nothing left to say,
nowadays, when such blows fell; hardly anything left to feel, it
sometimes seemed.

“Well, I suppose we must go and eat something,” the older man said; and
arm in arm they went out into the darkness.

When Campton returned home that night he sat down and, with the help of
several pipes, wrote a note to Mrs. Talkett asking when she would
receive him.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Thereafter he tried to go back to his painting and to continue his daily
visits to the Palais Royal office. But for the time nothing seemed to
succeed with him. He threw aside his study of Mme. Lebel?he hung about
the office, confused and idle, and with the ever clearer sense that
there also things were disintegrating.

George’s birthday party had been given up on account of young Dastrey’s
death. Mrs. Brant evidently thought the postponement unnecessary; since
George’s return she had gone over heart and soul to the “business as
usual” party. But Mr. Brant quietly sided with George; and Campton was
glad to be spared the necessity of celebrating the day in such a
setting.

It was some time since Campton had seen his son; but the fault was not
his son’s. The painter was aware of having voluntarily avoided George.
He said to himself: “As long as I know he’s safe why should I bother
him?” But in reality he did not feel himself to be fit company for any
one, and had even shunned poor Paul Dastrey on the latter’s hurried
passage through Paris, when he had come back from carrying the fatal
news to young Dastrey’s mother.

“What on earth could Paul and I have found to say to each other?”
Campton argued with himself. “For men of our age there’s nothing left to
say nowadays. The only thing I can do is to try to work up one of my old
studies of Louis. That might please him a little?later on.”

But after one or two attempts he pushed away that canvas too.

At length one afternoon George came in. They had not met for over a
week, and as George’s blue uniform detached itself against the blurred
tapestries of the studio, the north light modelling the fresh curves of
his face, the father’s heart gave a leap of pride. His son had never
seemed to him so young and strong and vivid.

George, with a sudden blush, took his hand in a long pressure.

“I say, Dad?Madge has told me. Told me that you know about us and that
you’ve persuaded her to see things as I do. She hadn’t had a chance to
speak to me of your visit till last night.”

Campton felt his colour rising; but though his own part in the business
still embarrassed him he was glad that the barriers were down.

“I didn’t want,” George continued, still flushed and slightly
constrained, “to say anything to you about all this till I could say:
‘Here’s my wife.’ And now she’s promised.”

“She’s promised?”

“Thanks to you, you know. Your visit to her did it. She told me the
whole thing yesterday. How she’d come here in desperation, to ask you to
help her, to have her mind cleared up for her; and how you’d thought it
all over, and then gone to see her, and how wise and perfect you’d been
about it all. Poor child?if you knew the difference it’s made to her!”

They were seated now, the littered table between them. Campton, his
elbows on it, his chin on his hands, looked across at his son, who faced
the light.

“The difference to you too?” he questioned.

George smiled: it was exactly the same detached smile which he used to
shed on the little nurse who brought him his cocoa.

“Of course. Now I can go back without worrying.” He let the words fall
as carelessly as if there were nothing in them to challenge attention.

“Go back?” Campton stared at him with a blank countenance. Had he heard
aright? The noise of a passing lorry suddenly roared in his ears like
the guns of the front.

“Did you say: _go back_?”

George opened his blue eyes wide. “Why, of course; as soon as ever I’m
patched up. You didn’t think???”

“I thought you had the sense to realize that you’ve done your share in
one line, and that your business now is to do it in another.”

The same detached smile again brushed George’s lips. “But if I happen to
have only one line?”

“Nonsense! You know they don’t think that at the War Office.”

“I don’t believe the War Office will shut down if I leave it.”

“What an argument! It sounds like??” Campton, breaking off on a sharp
breath, closed his lids for a second. He had been gazing too steadily
into George’s eyes, and now at last he knew what that mysterious look in
them meant. It was Benny Upsher’s look, of course?inaccessible to
reason, beyond reason, belonging to other spaces, other weights and
measures, over the edge, somehow, of the tangible calculable world....

“A man can’t do more than his duty: you’ve done that,” he growled.

But George insisted with his gentle obstinacy: “You’ll feel differently
about it when America comes in.”

Campton shook his head. “Never about your case.”

“You will?when you see how we all feel. When we’re all in it you
wouldn’t have me looking on, would you? And then there are my men?I’ve
got to get back to my men.”

“But you’ve no right to go now; no business,” his father broke in
violently. “Persuading that poor girl to wreck her life ... and then
leaving her, planting her there with her past ruined, and her future....
George, you can’t!”

George, in his long months of illness, had lost his old ruddiness of
complexion. At his father’s challenge the blood again rose the more
visibly to his still-gaunt cheeks and white forehead: he was evidently
struck.

“You’ll kill her?and kill your mother!” Campton stormed.

“Oh, it’s not for to-morrow. Not for a long time, perhaps. My shoulder’s
still too stiff. I was stupid,” the young man haltingly added, “to put
it as I did. Of course I’ve got to think of Madge now,” he acknowledged,
“as well as mother.”

The blood flowed slowly back to Campton’s heart. “You’ve got to think
of?just the mere common-sense of the thing. That’s all I ask. You’ve
done your turn; you’ve done more. But never mind that. Now it’s
different. You’re barely patched up: you’re of use, immense use, for
staff-work, and you know it. And you’ve asked a woman to tie up her
future to yours?at what cost you know too. It’s as much your duty to
keep away from the front now as it was before?well, I admit it?to go
there. You’ve done just what I should have wanted my son to do, up to
this minute??”

George laid a hand on his a little wistfully. “Then just go on trusting
me.”

“I do?to see that I’m right! If I can’t convince you, ask Boylston?ask
Adele!”

George sat staring down at the table. For the first time since they had
met at Doullens Campton was conscious of reaching his son’s inner mind,
and of influencing it.

“I wonder if you really love her?” he suddenly risked.

The question did not seem to offend George, scarcely to surprise him.
“Of course,” he said simply. “Only?well, everything’s different
nowadays, isn’t it? So many of the old ideas have come to seem such
humbug. That’s what I want to drag her out of?the coils and coils of
stale humbug. They were killing her.”

“Well?take care _you_ don’t,” Campton said, thinking that everything was
different indeed, as he recalled the reasons young men had had for
loving and marrying in his own time.

A faint look of amusement came into George’s eyes. “Kill her? Oh, no.
I’m gradually bringing her to life. But all this is hard to talk
about?yet. By-and-bye you’ll understand; she’ll show you, we’ll show you
together. But at present nothing’s to be said?to any one, please, not
even to mother. Madge thinks this is no time for such things. There, of
course, I don’t agree; but I must be patient. The secrecy, the
under-handedness, are hateful to me; but for her it’s all a part of the
sacred humbug.”

He rose listlessly, as if the discussion had bled all the life out of
him, and took himself away.

When he had gone his father drew a deep breath. Yes?the boy would stay
in Paris; he would almost certainly stay; for the present, at any rate.
And people were still prophesying that in the spring there would be a
big push all along the line; and after that the nightmare might be over.
Campton was glad he had gone to see Madge Talkett. He was glad, above
all, that if the thing had to be done it was over, and that, by Madge’s
wish, no one was to know of what had passed between them. It was a
distinct relief, in spite of what he had suggested to George, not to
have to carry that particular problem to Adele Anthony or Boylston.

A few days later George accepted a staff-appointment in Paris.




                                BOOK IV




                                 XXXII


Heavily the weeks went by.

The world continued to roar on through smoke and flame, and contrasted
with that headlong race was the slow dragging lapse of hours and days to
those who had to wait on events inactively.

When Campton met Paul Dastrey for the first time after the death of the
latter’s nephew, the two men exchanged a long hand-clasp and then sat
silent. As Campton had felt from the first, there was nothing left for
them to say to each other. If young men like Louis Dastrey must continue
to be sacrificed by hundreds of thousands to save their country, for
whom was the country being saved? Was it for the wasp-waisted youths in
sham uniforms who haunted the reawakening hotels and restaurants, in the
frequent intervals between their ambulance trips to safe distances from
the front? Or for the elderly men like Dastrey and Campton, who could
only sit facing each other with the spectre of the lost between them?
Young Dastrey, young Fortin-Lescluze, Rene Davril, Benny Upsher?and how
many hundreds more each day! And not even a child left by most of them,
to carry on the faith they had died for....

“If we’re giving all we care for so that those little worms can reopen
their dance-halls on the ruins, what in God’s name _is_ left?” Campton
questioned.

Dastrey sat looking at the ground, his grey head bent between his hands.
“France,” he said.

“What’s France, with no men left?”

“Well?I suppose, an Idea.”

“Yes. I suppose so.” Campton stood up heavily.

An Idea: they must cling to that. If Dastrey, from the depths of his
destitution, could still feel it and live by it, why did it not help
Campton more? An Idea: that was what France, ever since she had existed,
had always been in the story of civilization; a luminous point about
which striving visions and purposes could rally. And in that sense she
had been as much Campton’s spiritual home as Dastrey’s; to thinkers,
artists, to all creators, she had always been a second country. If
France went, western civilization went with her; and then all they had
believed in and been guided by would perish. That was what George had
felt; it was what had driven him from the Argonne to the Aisne. Campton
felt it too; but dully, through a fog. His son was safe; yes?but too
many other men’s sons were dying. There was no spot where his thoughts
could rest: there were moments when the sight of George, intact and
immaculate?his arm at last out of its sling?rose before his father like
a reproach.

The feeling was senseless; but there it was. Whenever the young man
entered the room Campton saw him attended by the invisible host of his
comrades, the fevered, the maimed and the dying. The Germans had
attacked at Verdun: horrible daily details of the struggle were pouring
in. No one at the rear had really known, except in swift fitful flashes,
about the individual suffering of the first months of the war; now such
information was systematized and distributed everywhere, daily, with a
cold impartial hand. And every night, when one laid one’s old bones on
one’s bed, there were those others, the young in their thousands, lying
down, perhaps never to rise again, in the mud and blood of the trenches.

Even Boylston’s Preparedness was beginning to get on Campton’s nerves.
He tried to picture to himself how he should exult when his country at
last fell into line; but he could realize only what his humiliation
would be if she did not. It was almost a relief, at this time, to have
his mind diverted to the dissensions among “The Friends of French Art,”
where, at a stormy meeting, Harvey Mayhew, as a member of the Finance
Committee, had asked for an accounting of the money taken in at Mrs.
Talkett’s concert. This money, Mr. Mayhew stated, had passed through a
number of hands. It should have been taken over by Mr. Boylston, as
treasurer, at the close of the performance; but he had failed to claim
it?had, in fact, been unfindable when the organizers of the concert
brought their takings to Mrs. Talkett?and the money, knocking about from
hand to hand, had finally been carried by Mrs. Talkett herself to Mr.
Campton. The latter, when asked to entrust it to Mr. Mayhew, had refused
on the ground that he had already deposited it in the bank; but a number
of days later it was known to be still in his possession. All this time
Mr. Boylston, treasurer, and chairman of the Financial Committee,
appeared to think it quite in order that the funds should have been (as
he assumed) deposited in the bank by a member who was not on that
particular committee, and who, in reality, had forgotten that they were
in his possession.

Mr. Mayhew delivered himself of this indictment amid an embarrassed
silence. To Campton it had seemed as if a burst of protest must
instantly clear the air. But after he himself had apologized for his
negligence in not depositing the money, and Boylston had disengaged his
responsibility in a few quiet words, there followed another blank
interval. Then Mr. Mayhew suddenly suggested a complete reorganization
of the work. He had something to criticize in every department. He, who
so seldom showed himself at the office, now presented a list of
omissions and commissions against which one after another of the active
members rose to enter a mild denial. It was clear that some one
belonging to the organization, and who was playing into his hands, had
provided him with a series of cleverly falsified charges against the
whole group of workers.

Presently Campton could stand it no longer, and, jumping up, suddenly
articulate, he flung into his cousin’s face a handful of home-truths
under which he expected that glossy countenance to lose its lustre. But
Mr. Mayhew bore the assault with urbanity. It did not behove him, he
said, to take up the reproaches addressed to him by the most
distinguished member of their committee?the most distinguished, he might
surely say without offence to any of the others (a murmur of assent); it
did not behove him, because one of the few occasions on which a great
artist may be said to be at a disadvantage is when he is trying to
discuss business matters with a man of business. He, Mr. Mayhew, was
only that, nothing more; but he _was_ that, and he had been trained to
answer random abuse by hard facts. In no way did he intend to reflect on
the devoted labours of certain ladies of the committee, nor on their
sympathetic treasurer’s gallant efforts to acquire, amid all his other
pressing interests, the rudiments of business habits; but Miss Anthony
had all along been dividing her time between two widely different
charities, and Mr. Boylston, like his distinguished champion, was first
of all an artist, with the habits of the studio rather than of the
office. In the circumstances??

Campton jumped to his feet again. If he stayed a moment longer he felt
he should knock Mayhew down. He jammed his hat on, shouted out “I
resign,” and limped out of the room.

It was the way in which his encounters with practical difficulties
always ended. The consciousness of his inferiority in argument, the
visionary’s bewilderment when incomprehensible facts are thrust on him
by fluent people, the helpless sense of not knowing what to answer, and
of seeing his dream-world smashed in the rough-and-tumble of shabby
motives?it all gave him the feeling that he was drowning, and must fight
his way to the surface before they had him under.

In the street he stood in a cold sweat of remorse. He knew the charges
of negligence against Miss Anthony and Boylston were trumped up. He knew
there was an answer to be made, and that he was the man to make it; and
his eyes filled with tears of rage and self-pity at his own
incompetence. But then he took heart at the thought of Boylston’s
astuteness and Miss Anthony’s courage. They would not let themselves be
beaten?probably they would fight their battle better without him. He
tried to protect his retreat with such arguments, and when he got back
to the studio he called up Mme. Lebel, and plunged again into his
charcoal study of her head. He did not remember having ever worked with
such supernatural felicity: it was as if _that_ were his victorious
answer to all their lies and intrigues....

But the Mayhew party was victorious too. How it came about a mind like
Campton’s could not grasp. Mr. Mayhew, it appeared, had let fall that a
very large gift of money from the world-renowned philanthropist, Sir
Cyril Jorgenstein (obtained through the good offices of Mmes. de
Dolmetsch and Beausite) was contingent on certain immediate changes in
the organization (“drastic changes” was Mr. Mayhew’s phrase); and
thereupon several hitherto passive members had suddenly found voice to
assert the duty of not losing this gift. After that the way was clear.
Adele Anthony and Boylston were offered ornamental posts which they
declined, and within a week the Palais Royal saw them no more, and Paris
drawing-rooms echoed with the usual rumours of committee wrangles and
dark discoveries.

The episode left Campton with a bitter taste in his soul. It seemed to
him like an ugly little allegory of Germany’s manœuvring the world into
war. The speciousness of Mr. Mayhew’s arguments, the sleight-of-hand by
which he had dislodged the real workers and replaced them by his
satellites, reminded the painter of the neutrals who were beginning to
say that there were two sides to every question, that war was always
cruel, and how about the Russian atrocities in Silesia? As the months
dragged on a breath of lukewarmness had begun to blow through the world,
damping men’s souls, confusing plain issues, casting a doubt on the
worth of everything. People were beginning to ask what one knew, after
all, of the secret motives which had impelled half-a-dozen
self-indulgent old men ensconced in Ministerial offices to plunge the
world in ruin. No one seemed to feel any longer that life is something
more than being alive; apparently the only people not tired of the
thought of death were the young men still pouring out to it in their
thousands.

Still those thousands poured; still the young died; still, wherever
Campton went, he met elderly faces, known and unknown, disfigured by
grief, shrunken with renunciation. And still the months wore on without
result.

One day in crossing the Tuileries he felt the same soft sparkle which,
just about a year earlier, had abruptly stirred the sap in him. Yes?it
was nearly a year since the day when he had noticed the first
horse-chestnut blossoms, and been reminded by Mme. Lebel that he ought
to buy some new shirts; and though to-day the horse-chestnuts were still
leafless they were already misty with buds, and the tall white clouds
above them full-uddered with spring showers. It was spring again, spring
with her deluding promises?her gilding of worn stones and chilly water,
the mystery of her distances, the finish and brilliance of her nearer
strokes. Campton, in spite of himself, drank down the life-giving
draught and felt its murmur in his veins. And just then, across the
width of the gardens he saw, beyond a stretch of turf and clipped
shrubs, two people, also motionless, who seemed to have the same cup at
their lips. He recognized his son and Mrs. Talkett.

Their backs were toward him, and they stood close together, looking with
the same eyes at the same sight: an Apollo touched with flying sunlight.
After a while they walked on again, slowly and close to each other.
George, as they moved, seemed now and then to point out some beauty of
sculpture, or the colour of a lichened urn; and once they turned and
took their fill of the great perspective tapering to the Arch?the Arch
on which Rude’s Mænad-Marseillaise still yelled her battalions on to
death.




                                 XXXIII


Campton finished his charcoal of Mme. Lebel; then he attacked her in
oils. Now that his work at the Palais Royal was ended, painting was once
more his only refuge.

Adele Anthony had returned to her refugees; Boylston, pale and
obstinate, toiled on at Preparedness. But Campton found it impossible to
take up any new form of work; his philanthropic ardour was exhausted. He
could only shut himself up, for long solitary hours, in the empty and
echoing temple of his art.

George emphatically approved of his course: George was as insistent as
Mrs. Brant on the duty of “business as usual.” But on the young man’s
lips the phrase had a different meaning; it seemed the result of that
altered perspective which Campton was conscious of whenever, nowadays,
he tried to see things as his son saw them. George was not indifferent,
he was not callous; but he seemed to feel himself mysteriously set
apart, destined to some other task for which he was passively waiting.
Even the split among “The Friends of French Art” left him, despite of
his admiration for Boylston, curiously unperturbed. He seemed to have
taken the measure of all such ephemeral agitations, and to regard them
with an indulgent pity which was worse than coldness.

“He feels that all we do is so useless,” Campton said to Dastrey; “he’s
like a gardener watching ants rebuild their hill in the middle of a
path, and knowing all the while that hill and path are going to be wiped
out by his pick.”

“Ah, they’re all like that,” Dastrey murmured.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Mme. Lebel came up to the studio every afternoon. The charcoal study had
been only of her head; but for the painting Campton had seated her in
her own horsehair armchair, her smoky lamp beside her, her sewing in her
lap. More than ever he saw in the wise old face something typical of its
race and class: the obstinate French gift, as some one had put it, of
making one more effort after the last effort. The old woman could not
imagine why he wanted to paint her; but when one day he told her it was
for her grandsons, her eyes filled, and she said: “For which one, sir?
For they’re both at Verdun.”

One autumn afternoon he was late in getting back to the studio, where he
knew she was waiting for him. He pushed the door open, and there, in the
beaten-down attitude in which he had once before seen her, she lay
across the table, her cap awry, her hands clutching her sewing, and
George kneeling at her side. The young man’s arm was about her, his head
pressed against her breast; and on the floor lay the letter, the fatal
letter which was always, nowadays, the key to such scenes.

Neither George nor the old woman had heard Campton enter; and for a
moment he stood and watched them. George’s face, so fair and ruddy
against Mme. Lebel’s rusty black, wore a look of boyish compassion which
Campton had never seen on it. Mme. Lebel had sunk into his hold as if it
soothed and hushed her; and Campton said to himself: “These two are
closer to each other than George and I, because they’ve both seen the
horror face to face. He knows what to say to her ever so much better
than he knows what to say to his mother or me.”

But apparently there was no need to say much. George continued to kneel
in silence; presently he bent and kissed the old woman’s cheek; then he
got to his feet and saw his father.

“The _Chasseur Alpin_,” he merely said, picking up the letter and
handing it to Campton. “It was the grandson she counted on most.”

Mme. Lebel caught sight of Campton, smoothed herself and stood up also.

“I had found him a wife?a strong healthy girl with a good _dot_. There
go my last great-grandchildren! For the other will be killed too. I
don’t understand any more, do you?” She made an automatic attempt to
straighten the things on the table, but her hands beat the air and
George had to lead her downstairs.

It was that day that Campton said to himself: “We shan’t keep him in
Paris much longer.” But the heavy weeks of spring and summer passed, the
inconclusive conflict at the front went on with its daily toll of dead,
and George still stuck to his job. Campton, during this time, continued
to avoid the Brants as much as possible. His wife’s conversation was
intolerable to him; her obtuse optimism, now that she had got her son
back, was even harder to bear than the guiltily averted glance of Mr.
Brant, between whom and Campton their last talk had hung a lasting
shadow of complicity.

But most of all Campton dreaded to meet the Talketts; the wife with her
flushed cheek-bones and fixed eyes, the husband still affably and
continuously arguing against Philistinism. One afternoon the painter
stumbled on them, taking tea with George in Boylston’s little flat; but
he went away again, unable to bear the interminable discussion between
Talkett and Boylston, and the pacifist’s reiterated phrase: “To borrow
one of my wife’s expressions”?while George, with a closed brooding face,
sat silent, laughing drily now and then. What a different George from
the one his father had found, in silence also, kneeling beside Mme.
Lebel!

Once again Campton was vouchsafed a glimpse of that secret George. He
had walked back with his son after the funeral mass for young Lebel; and
in the porter’s lodge of the Avenue Marigny they found a soldier
waiting?a young square-built fellow, with a shock of straw-coloured hair
above his sunburnt rural face. Campton was turning from the door when
George dashed past him, caught the young man by both shoulders, and
shouted out his name. It was that of the orderly who had carried him out
of the firing-line and hunted him up the next day in the Doullens
hospital. Campton saw the look the two exchanged: it lasted only for the
taking of a breath; a moment later officer and soldier were laughing
like boys, and the orderly was being drawn forth to shake hands with
Campton. But again the glance was an illumination; it came straight from
that far country, the Benny Upsher country, which Campton so feared to
see in his son’s eyes.

The orderly had been visiting his family, fugitives from the invaded
regions who had taken shelter in one of Adele Anthony’s suburban
colonies. He had obtained permission to stop in Paris on his way back to
the front; and for two joyful days he was lodged and feasted in the
Avenue Marigny. Boylston provided him with an evening at Montmartre,
George and Mrs. Brant took him to the theatre and the cinema, and on the
last day of his leave Adele Anthony invited him to tea with Campton, Mr.
Brant and Boylston. Mr. Brant, as they left this entertainment, hung
back on the stairs to say in a whisper to Campton: “The family are
provided for?amply. I’ve asked George to mention the fact to the young
man; but not until just as he’s starting.”

Campton nodded. For George’s sake he was glad; yet he could not repress
a twinge of his dormant jealousy. Was it always to be Brant who thought
first of the things to make George happy?always Brant who would alone
have the power to carry them out?

“But he can’t prevent that poor fellow’s getting killed to-morrow,”
Campton thought almost savagely, as the young soldier beamed forth from
the taxi in which George was hurrying him to the station.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It was not many days afterward that George looked in at the studio early
one morning. Campton, over his breakfast, had been reading the
_communique_. There was heavy news from Verdun; from east to west the
air was dark with calamity; but George’s face had the look it had worn
when he greeted his orderly.

“Dad, I’m off,” he said; and sitting down at the table, he
unceremoniously poured himself some coffee into his father’s empty cup.

“The battalion’s been ordered back. I leave to-night. Let’s lunch
together somewhere presently, shall we?”

His eye was clear, his smile confident: a great weight seemed to have
fallen from him, and he looked like the little boy sitting up in bed
with his Lavengro. “After ten months of Paris??” he added, stretching
his arms over his head with a great yawn.

“Yes?the routine??” stammered Campton, not knowing what he said. Yet he
was glad too; yes, in his heart of hearts he knew he was glad; though,
as always happened, his emotion took him by the throat and silenced him.
But it did not matter, for George was talking.

“I shall have leave a good deal oftener nowadays,” he said with
animation. “And everything is ever so much better organized?letters and
all that. I shan’t seem so awfully far away. You’ll see.”

Campton still gazed at him, struggling for expression. Their hands met.
Campton said?or imagined he said: “I see?I do see, already??” though
afterward he was not even sure that he had spoken.

What he saw, with an almost blinding distinctness, was the extent to
which his own feeling, during the long months, had imperceptibly
changed, and how his inmost impulse, now that the blow had fallen, was
not of resistance to it, but of acquiescence, since it made him once
more one with his son.

He would have liked to tell that to George; but speech was impossible.
And perhaps, after all, it didn’t matter; it didn’t matter, because
George understood. Their hand-clasp had made that clear, and an hour or
two later they were lunching together almost gaily.

Boylston joined them, and the three went on together to say goodbye to
Adele Anthony. Adele, for once, was unprepared: it was almost a relief
to Campton, who had winced in advance at the thought of her warlike
attitude. The poor thing was far from warlike: her pale eyes clung to
George’s in a frightened stare, while her lips, a little stiffly,
repeated the stock phrases of good cheer. “Such a relief.... I
congratulate you ... getting out of all this _paperasserie_ and red
tape.... If I’d been you I couldn’t have stood Paris another minute....
The only hopeful people left are at the front....” It was the formula
that sped every departing soldier.

The day wore on. To Campton its hours seemed as interminable yet as
rapid as those before his son’s first departure, nearly two years
earlier. George had begged his father to come in the evening to the
Avenue Marigny, where he was dining with the Brants. It was easier for
Campton nowadays to fall in with such requests: during the months of
George’s sojourn in Paris a good many angles had had their edges rubbed
off.

Besides, at that moment he would have done anything for his son?his son
again at last! In their hand-clasp that morning the old George had come
back to him, simple, boyish, just as he used to be; and Campton’s dread
of the future was lightened by a great glow of pride.

In the Avenue Marigny dining-room the Brants and George were still
sitting together about the delicate silver and porcelain. There were no
flowers: Julia, always correct, had long since banished them as a
superfluity. But there was champagne for George’s farewell, and a
glimpse of rich fare being removed.

Mr. Brant rose to greet Campton. His concise features were drawn with
anxiety, and with the effort to hide it; but his wife appeared to
Campton curiously unperturbed, and the leave-taking was less painful and
uselessly drawn out than he had expected.

George and his father were to be sent to the station in Mr. Brant’s
motor. Campton, as he got in, remembered with a shiver the grey morning,
before daylight, when the same motor had stood at the studio door,
waiting to carry him to Doullens; between himself and his son he seemed
to see Mr. Brant’s small suffering profile.

To shake off the memory he said: “Your mother’s in wonderfully good
form. I was glad to see she wasn’t nervous.”

George laughed. “No. Madge met her this morning at the new
_clairvoyante’s_.?It does them all a lot of good,” he added, with his
all-embracing tolerance.

Campton shivered again. That universal smiling comprehension of George’s
always made him seem remoter than ever. “It makes him seem so old?a
thousand years older than I am.” But he forced an acquiescent laugh, and
presently George went on: “About Madge?you’ll be awfully good to her,
won’t you, if I get smashed?”

“My dear boy!”

There was another pause, and then Campton risked a question. “Just how
do things stand? I know so little, after all.”

For a moment George seemed to hesitate: his thick fair eyebrows were
drawn into a puzzled frown. “I know?I’ve never explained it to you
properly. I’ve tried to; but I was never sure that I could make you
see.” He paused and added quietly: “I know now that she’ll never divorce
Talkett.”

“You know???” Campton exclaimed with a great surge of relief.

“She thinks she will; but I see that the idea still frightens her. And
I’ve kept on using the divorce argument only as a pretext.”

The words thrust Campton back into new depths of perplexity. “A
pretext?” he echoed.

“My dear old Dad?don’t you guess? She’s come to care for me awfully; if
we’d gone all the lengths she wanted, and then I’d got killed, there
would have been nothing on earth left for her. I hadn’t the right, don’t
you see? We chaps haven’t any futures to dispose of till this job we’re
in is finished. Of course, if I come back, and she can make up her mind
to break with everything she’s used to, we shall marry; but if things go
wrong I’d rather leave her as she is, safe in her little old rut. So
many people can’t live out of one?and she’s one of them, poor child,
though she’s so positive she isn’t.”

Campton sat chilled and speechless as the motor whirled them on through
the hushed streets. It paralyzed his faculties to think that in a moment
more they would be at the station.

“It’s awfully fine: your idea,” he stammered at length.
“Awfully?magnanimous.” But he still felt the chill down his spine.

“Oh, it’s only that things look to us so different?so indescribably
different?and always will, I suppose, even after this business is over.
We seem to be sealed to it for life.”

“Poor girl?poor girl!” Campton thought within himself. Aloud he said:
“My dear chap, of course you can count on my being?my doing??”

“Of course, of course, old Dad.”

They were at the station. Father and son got out and walked toward the
train. Campton put both hands on George’s shoulders.

“Look here,” George broke out, “there’s one thing more. I want to tell
you that I know what a lot I owe to you and Adele. You’ve both been
awfully fine: did you know it? You two first made me feel a lot of
things I hadn’t felt before. And you know this _is_ my job; I’ve never
been surer of it than at this minute.”

They clasped hands in silence, each looking his fill of the other; then
the crowd closed in, George exclaimed: “My kit-bag!” and somehow, in the
confusion, the parting was over, and Campton, straining blurred eyes,
saw his son’s smile?the smile of the light-hearted lad of old days?flash
out at him from the moving train. For an instant the father had the
illusion that it was the goodbye look of the boy George, going back to
school after the holidays.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Campton, as he came out of the station, stumbled, to his surprise, on
Mr. Brant. The little man, as they met, flushed and paled, and sought
the customary support from his eye-glasses.

“I followed you in the other motor,” he said, looking away.

“Oh, I say??” Campton murmured; then, with an effort: “Shouldn’t you
like me to drive back with you?”

Mr. Brant shook his head. “Thank you. Thank you very much. But it’s late
and you’ll want to be getting home. I’ll be glad if you’ll use my car.”
Together they strolled slowly across the station court to the place
where the private motors waited; but there Campton held out his hand.

“Much obliged; I think I’ll walk.”

Mr. Brant nodded; then he said abruptly: “This _clairvoyante_ business:
is there anything in it, do you think? You saw how calm?er?Julia was
just now: she wished me to tell you that that Spanish woman she goes
to?her name is Olida, I think?had absolutely reassured her about ...
about the future. The woman says she knows that George will come back
soon, and never be sent to the front again. Those were the exact words,
I believe. _Never be sent to the front again._ Julia put every kind of
question, and couldn’t trip her up; she wanted me to tell you so. It
does sound...? Well, at any rate, it’s a help to the mothers.”




                                 XXXIV


The next morning Campton said to himself: “I can catch that goodbye look
if I get it down at once??” and pulled out a canvas before Mme. Lebel
came in with his coffee.

As sometimes happened to him, the violent emotions of the last
twenty-four hours had almost immediately been clarified and transmuted
into vision. He felt that he could think contentedly of George if he
could sit down at once and paint him.

The picture grew under his feverish fingers?feverish, yet how firm! He
always wondered anew at the way in which, at such hours, the inner flame
and smoke issued in a clear guiding radiance. He saw?he saw; and the
mere act of his seeing seemed to hold George safe in some pure
impenetrable medium. His boy was there, sitting to him, the old George
he knew and understood, essentially, vividly face to face with him.

He was interrupted by a ring. Mme. Lebel, tray in hand, opened the door,
and a swathed and voluminous figure, sweeping in on a wave of musk,
blotted her out. Campton, exasperated at the interruption, turned to
face Mme. Olida.

So remote were his thoughts that he would hardly have recognized her had
she not breathed, on the old familiar guttural: “Juanito!”

He was less surprised at her intrusion than annoyed at being torn from
his picture. “Didn’t you see a sign on the door? ‘No admission before
twelve’??” he growled.

“Oh, yes,” she said; “that’s how I knew you were in.”

“But I’m _not_ in; I’m working. I can’t allow??”

Her large bosom rose. “I know, my heart! I remember how stern you always
were. ‘Work?work?my work!’ It was always that, even in the first days.
But I come to you on my knees: Juanito, imagine me there!” She sketched
a plunging motion of her vast body, arrested it in time by supporting
herself on the table, and threw back her head entreatingly, so that
Campton caught a glint of the pearls in a crevasse of her quaking
throat. He saw that her eyes were red with weeping.

“What can I do? You’re in trouble?”

“Oh, such trouble, my heart?such trouble!” She leaned to him, absorbing
his hands in her plump muscular grasp. “I must have news of my son; I
must! The young man?you saw him that day you came with your wife? Yes?he
looked in at the door: beautiful as a god, was he not? That was my son
Pepito!” And with a deep breath of pride and anguish she unburdened
herself of her tale.

Two or three years after her parting with Campton she had married a
clever French barber from the Pyrenees. He had brought her to France,
and they had opened a “Beauty Shop” at Biarritz and had prospered.
Pepito was born there and soon afterward, alas, her clever husband,
declaring that he “hated grease in cooking or in woman” (“and after my
Pepito’s birth I became as you now see me”), had gone off with the
manicure and all their savings. Mme. Olida had had a struggle to bring
up her boy; but she had kept on with the Beauty Shop, had made a success
of it, and not long before the war had added fortune-telling to massage
and hair-dressing.

“And my son, Juanito; was not my son an advertisement for a Beauty Shop,
I ask you? Before he was out of petticoats he brought me customers;
before he was sixteen all the ladies who came to me were quarrelling
over him. Ah, there were moments when he crucified me ... but lately he
had grown more reasonable, had begun to see where his true interests
lay, and we had become friends again, friends and business partners.
When the war broke out I came to Paris; I knew that all the mothers
would want news of their sons. I have made a great deal of money; and I
have had wonderful results?wonderful! I could give you instances?names
that you know?where I have foretold everything! Oh, I have the gift, my
heart, I have it!”

She pressed his hands with a smile of triumph; then her face clouded
again.

“But six months ago my darling was called to his regiment?and for three
months now I’ve had no news of him, none, none!” she sobbed, the tears
making dark streaks through her purplish powder.

The upshot of it was that she had heard that Campton was “all-powerful”;
that he knew Ministers and Generals, knew great financiers like
Jorgenstein (who were so much more powerful than either Generals or
Ministers), and could, if he chose, help her to trace her boy, who, from
the day of his departure for the front, had vanished as utterly as if
the earth had swallowed him.

“Not a word, not a sign?to me, his mother, who have slaved and slaved
for him, who have made a fortune for him!”

Campton looked at her, marvelling. “But your gift as you call it ...
your powers ... you can’t use them for yourself?”

She returned his look with a tearful simplicity: she hardly seemed to
comprehend what he was saying. “But my son! I want _news_ of my son,
real news; I want a letter; I want to see some one who has seen him! To
touch a hand that has touched him! Oh, don’t you understand?”

“Yes, I understand,” he said; and she took up her desperate litany,
clinging about him with soft palms like medusa-lips, till by dint of
many promises he managed to detach himself and steer her gently to the
door.

On the threshold she turned to him once more. “And your own son,
Juanito?I know he’s at the front again. His mother came the other
day?she often comes. And I can promise you things if you’ll help me. No,
even if you don’t help me?for the old days’ sake, I will! I know secrets
... magical secrets that will protect him. There’s a Moorish salve,
infallible against bullets ... handed down from King Solomon ... I can
get it....”

Campton, guiding her across the sill, led her out and bolted the door on
her; then he went back to his easel and stood gazing at the sketch of
George. But the spell was broken: the old George was no longer there.
The war had sucked him back into its awful whirlpool?once more he was
that dark enigma, a son at the front....

                  *       *       *       *       *

In the heavy weeks which followed, a guarded allusion of Campton’s
showed him one day that Boylston was aware of there being “something
between” George and Madge Talkett.

“Not that he’s ever said anything?or even encouraged me to guess
anything. But she’s got a talking face, poor little thing; and not much
gift of restraint. And I suppose it’s fairly obvious to everybody?except
perhaps to Talkett?that she’s pretty hard hit.”

“Yes. And George?”

Boylston’s round face became remote and mysterious. “We don’t really
know?do we, sir??exactly how any of them feel? Any more than if they
were??” He drew up sharply on the word, but Campton faced it.

“Dead?”

“Transfigured, say; no, trans??what’s the word in the theology books? A
new substance ... somehow....”

“Ah, you feel that too?” the father exclaimed.

“Yes. They don’t know it themselves, though?how far they are from us. At
least I don’t think they do.”

Campton nodded. “But George, in the beginning, was?frankly indifferent
to the war, wasn’t he?”

“Yes; intellectually he was. But he told me that when he saw the first
men on their way back from the front?with the first mud on them?he knew
he belonged where they’d come from. I tried hard to persuade him when he
was here that his real job was on a military mission to America?and it
_was_. Think what he might have done out there! But it was no use. His
orderly’s visit did the trick. It’s the thought of their men that pulls
them all back. Look at Louis Dastrey?they couldn’t keep him in America.
There’s something in all their eyes: I don’t know what. _Dulce et
decorum_, perhaps??”

“Yes.”

There was a pause before Campton questioned: “And Talkett?”

“Poor little ass?I don’t know. He’s here arguing with me nearly every
day. She looks over his shoulder, and just shrugs at me with her
eyebrows.”

“Can you guess what she thinks of George’s attitude?”

“Oh, something different every day. I don’t believe she’s ever really
understood. But then she loves him, and nothing else counts.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Brant continued to face life with apparent serenity. She had
returned several times to Mme. Olida’s, and had always brought away the
same reassuring formula: she thought it striking, and so did her
friends, that the _clairvoyante’s_ prediction never varied.

There was reason to believe that George’s regiment had been sent to
Verdun, and from Verdun the news was growing daily more hopeful. This
seemed to Mrs. Brant a remarkable confirmation of Olida’s prophecy.
Apparently it did not occur to her that, in the matter of human life,
victories may be as ruinous as defeats; and she triumphed in the fact?it
had grown to be a fact to her?that her boy was at Verdun, when he might
have been in the Somme, where things, though stagnant, were on the whole
going less well. Mothers prayed for “a quiet sector”?and then, she
argued, what happened? The men grew careless, the officers were oftener
away; your son was ordered out to see to the repairs of a barbed wire
entanglement, and a sharpshooter picked him off while you were sitting
reading one of his letters, and thinking: “Thank God he’s out of the
fighting.” And besides, Olida was _sure_, and all her predictions had
been so wonderful....

Campton began to dread his wife’s discovering Mme. Olida’s fears for her
own son. Every endeavour to get news of Pepito had been fruitless;
finally Campton and Boylston concluded that the young man must be a
prisoner. The painter had a second visit from Mme. Olida, in the course
of which he besought her (without naming Julia) to be careful not to
betray her private anxiety to the poor women who came to her for
consolation; and she fixed her tortured velvet eyes on him
reproachfully.

“How could you think it of me, Juanito? The money I earn is for my boy!
That gives me the strength to invent a new lie every morning.”

He took her fraudulent hand and kissed it.

The next afternoon he met Mrs. Brant walking down the Champs Elysees
with her light girlish step. She lifted a radiant face to his. “A letter
from George this morning! And, do you know, Olida prophesied it? I was
there again yesterday; and she told me that he would soon be back, and
that at that very moment she could see him writing to me. You’ll admit
it’s extraordinary? So many mothers depend on her?I couldn’t live
without her. And her messages from her own son are so beautiful??”

“From her own son?”

“Yes: didn’t I tell you? He says such perfect things to her. And she
confessed to me, poor woman, that before the war he hadn’t always been
kind: he used to take her money, and behave badly. But now every day he
sends her a thought-message?such beautiful things! She says she wouldn’t
have the courage to keep us all up if it weren’t for the way that she’s
kept up by her boy. And now,” Julia added gaily, “I’m going to order the
cakes for my bridge-tea this afternoon. You know I promised Georgie I
wouldn’t give up my bridge-teas.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Now and then Campton returned to his latest portrait of his son; but in
spite of George’s frequent letters, in spite of the sudden drawing
together of father and son during their last moments at the station, the
vision of the boy George, the careless happy George who had ridiculed
the thought of war and pursued his millennial dreams of an enlightened
world?that vision was gone. Sometimes Campton fancied that the letters
themselves increased this effect of remoteness. They were necessarily
more guarded than the ones written, before George’s wounding, from an
imaginary H.Q.; but that did not wholly account for the difference.
Campton, in the last analysis, could only say that his vision of his boy
was never quite in focus. Either?as in the moment when George had
comforted Mme. Lebel, or greeted his orderly, or when he had said those
last few broken words at the station?he seemed nearer than ever, seemed
part and substance of his father; or else he became again that beautiful
distant apparition, the winged sentry guarding the Unknown.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The weeks thus punctuated by private anxieties rolled on dark with doom.
At last, in December, came the victory of Verdun. Men took it reverently
but soberly. The price paid had been too heavy for rejoicing; and the
horizon was too ominous in other quarters. Campton had hoped that the
New Year would bring his son back on leave; but still George did not
speak of coming. Meanwhile Boylston’s face grew rounder and more
beaming. At last America was stirring in her sleep. “Oh, if only George
were out there!” Boylston used to cry, as if his friend had been an
army. His faith in George’s powers of persuasion was almost mystical.
And not long afterward Campton had the surprise of a visit which seemed,
in the most unforeseen way, to confirm this belief. Returning to his
studio one afternoon he found it tenanted by Mr. Roger Talkett.

The young man, as carefully brushed and equipped as usual, but pale with
emotion, clutched the painter’s hand in a moist grasp.

“My dear Master, I had to see you?to see you alone and immediately.”

Campton looked at him with apprehension. What was the meaning of his
“alone”? Had Mrs. Talkett lost her head, and betrayed her secret?or had
she committed some act of imprudence of which the report had come back
to her husband?

“Do sit down,” said the painter weakly.

But his visitor, remaining sternly upright, shook his head and glanced
at his wrist-watch. “My moments,” he said, “are numbered?literally; all
I have time for is to implore you to look after my wife.” He drew a
handkerchief from his glossy cuff, and rubbed his eye-glasses.

“Your wife?” Campton echoed, dismayed.

“My dear sir, haven’t you guessed? It’s George’s wonderful example ...
his inspiration ... I’ve been converted! We men of culture can’t stand
by while the ignorant and illiterate are left to die for us. We must
leave that attitude to the Barbarian. Our duty is to set an example. I’m
off to-night for America?for Plattsburg.”

“Oh??” gasped Campton, wringing his hand.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Boylston burst into the studio the next day. “What did I tell you, sir?
George’s influence?it wakes up everybody. But Talkett?I’ll be hanged if
I should have thought it! And have you seen his wife? She’s a
war-goddess! I went to the station with them: their farewells were
harrowing. At that minute, you know, I believe she’d forgotten that
George ever existed!”

“Well, thank God for that,” Campton cried.

“Yes. Don’t you feel how we’re all being swept into it?” panted Boylston
breathlessly. His face had caught the illumination. “Sealed, as George
says?we’re sealed to the job, every one of us! Even I feel that, sitting
here at a stuffy desk....” He flushed crimson and his eyes filled.
“We’ll be in it, you know; America will?in a few weeks now, I believe!
George was as sure of it as I am. And, of course, if the war goes on,
our army will have to take short-sighted officers; won’t they, sir? As
England and France did from the first. They’ll need the men; they’ll
need us all, sir!”

“They’ll need _you_, my dear chap; and they’ll have you, to the full,
whatever your job is,” Campton smiled; and Boylston, choking back a sob,
dashed off again.

Yes, they were all being swept into it together?swept into the yawning
whirlpool. Campton felt that as clearly as all these young men; he felt
the triviality, the utter unimportance, of all their personal and
private concerns, compared with this great headlong outpouring of life
on the altar of conviction. And he understood why, for youths like
George and Boylston, nothing, however close and personal to them, would
matter till the job was over. “And not even for poor Talkett!” he
reflected whimsically.

That afternoon, curiously appeased, he returned once more to his picture
of his son. He had sketched the boy leaning out of the train window,
smiling back, signalling, saying goodbye, while his destiny rushed him
out into darkness as years ago the train used to rush him back to
school. And while Campton worked he caught the glow again; it rested on
brow and eyes, and spread in sure touches under his happy brush.

One day, as the picture progressed, he wavered over the remembrance of
some little detail of the face, and went in search of an old portfolio
into which, from time to time, he had been in the habit of thrusting his
unfinished studies of George. He plunged his hand into the heap, and
Georges of all ages looked forth at him: round baby-Georges, freckled
schoolboys, a thoughtful long-faced youth (the delicate George of St.
Moritz); but none seemed quite to serve his purpose and he rummaged on
till he came to a page torn from an old sketch-book. It was the pencil
study he had made of George as the lad lay asleep at the Crillon, the
night before his mobilisation.

Campton threw the sketch down on the table; and as he sat staring at it
he relived every phase of the emotion out of which it had been born. How
little he had known then?how little he had understood! He could bear to
look at the drawing now; could bear even to rethink the shuddering
thoughts with which he had once flung it away from him. Was it only
because the atmosphere was filled with a growing sense of hope? Because,
in spite of everything, the victory of Verdun was there to show the
inexhaustible strength of France, because people were more and more sure
that America was beginning to waken ... or just because, after too long
and fierce a strain, human nature always instinctively contrives to get
its necessary whiff of moral oxygen? Or was it that George’s influence
had really penetrated him, and that this strange renewed confidence in
life and in ideals was his son’s message of reassurance?

Certainly the old George was there, close to him, that morning; and
somewhere else?in scenes how different?he was sure that the actual
George, at that very moment, was giving out force and youth and hope to
those about him.

“I couldn’t be doing this if I didn’t understand?at last,” Campton
thought as he turned back to the easel. The little pencil sketch had
given him just the hint he needed, and he took up his palette with a
happy sigh.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A knock broke in on his rapt labour, and without turning he called out:
“Damn it, who are you? Can’t you read the sign? _Not in!_”

The door opened and Mr. Brant entered.

He appeared not to have heard the painter’s challenge; his eyes, from
the threshold, sprang straight to the portrait, and remained vacantly
fastened there. Campton, long afterward, remembered thinking, as he
followed the glance: “He’ll be trying to buy this one too!”

Mr. Brant moistened his lips, and his gaze, detaching itself from
George’s face, moved back in the same vacant way to Campton’s. The two
men looked at each other, and Campton jumped to his feet.

“Not?not???”

Mr. Brant tried to speak, and the useless effort contracted his mouth in
a pitiful grimace.

“_My son?_” Campton shrieked, catching him by the arm. The little man
dropped into a chair.

“Not dead ... not dead.... Hope ... hope ...” was shaken out of him in
jerks of anguish.

The door burst open again, and Boylston dashed in beaming. He waved
aloft a handful of morning papers.

“America! You’ve seen? They’ve sacked Bernstorff! Broken off
diplomatic??”

His face turned white, and he stood staring incredulously from one of
the two bowed men to the other.




                                  XXXV


Campton once more stood leaning in the window of a Paris hospital.

Before him, but viewed at another angle, was spread that same great
spectacle of the Place de la Concorde that he had looked down at from
the Crillon on the eve of mobilisation; behind him, in a fresh white
bed, George lay in the same attitude as when his father had stood in the
door of his room and sketched him while he slept.

All day there had run through Campton’s mind the _clairvoyante’s_
promise to Julia: “Your son will come back soon, and will never be sent
to the front again.”

Ah, this time it was true?never, never would he be sent to the front
again! They had him fast now, had him safe. That was the one certainty.
Fast how, safe how??the answer to that had long hung in the balance. For
two weeks or more after his return the surgeons had hesitated. Then
youth had seemed to conquer, and the parents had been told to hope that
after a long period of immobility George’s shattered frame would slowly
re-knit, and he would walk again?or at least hobble. A month had gone by
since then; and Campton could at last trust himself to cast his mind
back over the intervening days, so like in their anguish to those at
Doullens, yet so different in all that material aid and organization
could give.

Evacuation from the base, now so systematically and promptly effected,
had become a matter of course in all but the gravest cases; and even the
delicate undertaking of deflecting George’s course from the hospital
near the front to which he had been destined, and bringing him to Paris,
had been accomplished by a word in the right quarter from Mr. Brant.

Campton, from the first, had been opposed to the attempt to bring George
to Paris; partly perhaps because he felt that in the quiet provincial
hospital near the front he would be able to have his son to himself. At
any rate, the journey would have been shorter; though, as against that,
Paris offered more possibilities of surgical aid. His opposition had
been violent enough to check his growing friendliness with the Brants;
and at the hours when they came to see George, Campton now most often
contrived to be absent. Well, at any rate, George was alive, he was
there under his father’s eye, he was going to live: there seemed to be
no doubt about it now. Campton could think it all over slowly and even
calmly, marvelling at the miracle and taking it in.... So at least he
had imagined till he first made the attempt; then the old sense of
unreality enveloped him again, and he struggled vainly to clutch at
something tangible amid the swimming mists. “George?George?George??” He
used to say the name over and over below his breath, as he sat and
watched at his son’s bedside; but it sounded far off and hollow, like
the voice of a ghost calling to another.

Who was “George”? What did the name represent? The father left his post
in the window and turned back to the bed, once more searching the boy’s
face for enlightenment. But George’s eyes were closed: sleep lay on him
like an impenetrable veil. The sleep of ordinary men was not like that:
the light of their daily habits continued to shine through the chinks of
their closed faces. But with these others, these who had been down into
the lower circles of the pit, it was different: sleep instantly and
completely sucked them back into the unknown. There were times when
Campton, thus watching beside his son, used to say to himself: “If he
were dead he could not be farther from me”?so deeply did George seem
plunged in secret traffic with things unutterable.

Now and then Campton, sitting beside him, seemed to see a little way
into those darknesses; but after a moment he always shuddered back to
daylight, benumbed, inadequate, weighed down with the weakness of the
flesh and the incapacity to reach beyond his habitual limit of
sensation. “No wonder they don’t talk to us,” he mused.

By-and-bye, perhaps, when George was well again, and the war over, the
father might penetrate into his son’s mind, and find some new ground of
communion with him: now the thing was not to be conceived.

He recalled again Adele Anthony’s asking him, when he had come back from
Doullens: “What was the first thing you felt?” and his answering:
“Nothing.”... Well, it was like that now: every vibration had ceased in
him. Between himself and George lay the unbridgeable abyss of his son’s
experiences.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As he sat there, the door was softly opened a few inches and Boylston’s
face showed through the crack: light shot from it like the rays around a
chalice. At a sign from him Campton slipped out into the corridor and
Boylston silently pushed a newspaper into his grasp. He bent over it,
trying with dazzled eyes to read sense into the staring head-lines: but
“America?America?America??” was all that he could see.

A nurse came gliding up on light feet: the tears were running down her
face. “Yes?I know, I know, I know!” she exulted. Up the tall stairs and
through the ramifying of long white passages rose an unwonted rumour of
sound, checked, subdued, invisibly rebuked, but ever again breaking out,
like the noise of ripples on a windless beach. In every direction nurses
and orderlies were speeding from one room to another of the house of
pain with the message: “America has declared war on Germany.”

Campton and Boylston stole back into George’s room. George lifted his
eyelids and smiled at them, understanding before they spoke.

“The sixth of April! Remember the date!” Boylston cried over him in a
gleeful whisper.

The wounded man, held fast in his splints, contrived to raise his head a
little. His eyes laughed back into Boylston’s. “You’ll be in uniform
within a week!” he said; and Boylston crimsoned.

Campton turned away again to the window. The day had come?had come; and
his son had lived to see it. So many of George’s comrades had gone down
to death without hope; and in a few months more George, leaning from
that same window?or perhaps well enough to be watching the spectacle
with his father from the terrace of the Tuileries?would look out on the
first brown battalions marching across the Place de la Concorde, where
father and son, in the early days of the war, had seen the young
recruits of the Foreign Legion patrolling under improvised flags.

At the thought Campton felt a loosening of the tightness about his
heart. Something which had been confused and uncertain in his relation
to the whole long anguish was abruptly lifted, giving him the same sense
of buoyancy that danced in Boylston’s glance. At last, random atoms that
they were, they seemed all to have been shaken into their places,
pressed into the huge mysterious design which was slowly curving a new
firmament over a new earth....

There was another knock; and a jubilant nurse appeared, hardly visible
above a great bunch of lilacs tied with a starred and striped ribbon.
Campton, as he passed the flowers over to his son, noticed an envelope
with Mrs. Talkett’s perpendicular scrawl. George lay smiling, the lilacs
close to his pillow, his free hand fingering the envelope; but he did
not unseal the letter, and seemed to care less than ever to talk.

After an interval the door opened again, this time to show Mr. Brant’s
guarded face. He drew back slightly at the sight of Campton; but
Boylston, jumping up, passed close to the painter to breathe: “To-day,
sir, just to-day?you must!”

Campton went to the door and signed silently to Mr. Brant to enter.
Julia Brant stood outside, flushed and tearful, carrying as many orchids
as Mrs. Talkett had sent lilacs. Campton held out his hand, and with an
embarrassed haste she stammered: “We couldn’t wait??” Behind her he saw
Adele Anthony hurriedly coming up the stairs.

For a few minutes they all stood or sat about George’s bed, while their
voices, beginning to speak low, rose uncontrollably, interrupting one
another with tears and laughter. Mr. Brant and Boylston were both
brimming with news, and George, though he listened more than he spoke,
now and then put a brief question which loosened fresh floods. Suddenly
Campton noticed that the young man’s face, which had been too flushed,
grew pale; but he continued to smile, and his eyes to move responsively
from one illuminated face to the other. Campton, seeing that the others
meant to linger, presently rose and slipping out quietly walked across
the Rue de Rivoli to the deserted terrace of the Tuileries. There he sat
for a long time, looking out on the vast glittering spaces of the Place
de la Concorde, and calling up, with his painter’s faculty of vivid and
precise visualization, a future vision of interminable lines of brown
battalions marching past.

When he returned to the hospital after dinner the night-nurse met him.
She was not quite as well satisfied with her patient that evening:
hadn’t he perhaps had too many visitors? Yes, of course?she knew it had
been a great day, a day of international rejoicing, above all a blessed
day for France. But the doctors, from the beginning, must have warned
Mr. Campton that his son ought to be kept quiet-very quiet. The last
operation had been a great strain on his heart. Yes, certainly, Mr.
Campton might go in; the patient had asked for him. Oh, there was no
danger?no need for anxiety; only he must not stay too long; his son must
try to sleep.

Campton nodded, and stole in.

George lay motionless in the shaded lamplight: his eyes were open, but
they seemed to reflect his father’s presence without any change of
expression, like mirrors rather than like eyes. The room was doubly
silent after the joyful hubbub of the afternoon. The nurse had put the
orchids and lilacs where George’s eyes could rest on them. But was it on
the flowers that his gaze so tranquilly dwelt? Or did he see in their
place the faces of their senders? Or was he again in that far country
whither no other eyes could follow him?

Campton took his usual seat by the bed. Father and son looked at each
other, and the old George glanced out for half a second between the
wounded man’s lids.

“There was too much talking to-day,” Campton grumbled.

“Was there? I didn’t notice,” his son smiled.

No?he hadn’t noticed; he didn’t notice anything. He was a million miles
away again, whirling into his place in the awful pattern of that new
firmament....

“Tired, old man?” Campton asked under his breath.

“No; just glad,” said George contentedly.

His father laid a hand on his and sat silently beside him while the
spring night blew in upon them through the open window. The quiet
streets grew quieter, the hush in their hearts seemed gradually to steal
over the extinguished city. Campton kept saying to himself: “I must be
off,” and still not moving. The nurse was sure to come back
presently?why should he not wait till she dismissed him?

After a while, seeing that George’s eyes had closed, Campton rose, and
crept across the room to darken the lamp with a newspaper. His movement
must have roused his son, for he heard a slight struggle behind him and
the low cry: “Father!”

Campton turned and reached the bed in a stride. George, ashy-white, had
managed to lift himself a little on his free elbow.

“Anything wrong?” the father cried.

“No; everything all right,” George said. He dropped back, his lids
closing again, and a single twitch ran through the hand that Campton had
seized. After that he lay stiller than ever.




                                 XXXVI


George’s prediction had come true. At his funeral, three days afterward,
Boylston, a new-fledged member of the American Military Mission, was
already in uniform....

But through what perversity of attention did the fact strike Campton, as
he stood, a blank unfeeling automaton, in the front pew behind that
coffin draped with flags and flanked with candle-glitter? Why did one
thing rather than another reach to his deadened brain, and mostly the
trivial things, such as Boylston’s being already in uniform, and poor
Julia’s nose, under the harsh crape, looking so blue-red without its
powder, and the chaplain’s asking “O grave, where is thy victory?” in
the querulous tone of a schoolmaster reproaching a pupil who mislaid
things? It was always so with Campton: when sorrow fell it left him
insensible and dumb. Not till long afterward did he begin to feel its
birth-pangs....

                  *       *       *       *       *

They first came to him, those pangs, on a morning of the following July,
as he sat once more on the terrace of the Tuileries. Most of his time,
during the months since George’s death, had been spent in endless
aimless wanderings up and down the streets of Paris: and that day,
descending early from Montmartre, he had noticed in his listless way
that all the buildings on his way were fluttering with American flags.
The fact left him indifferent: Paris was always decorating nowadays for
one ally or another. Then he remembered that it must be the Fourth of
July; but the idea of the Fourth of July came to him, through the same
haze of indifference, as a mere far-off childish memory of surreptitious
explosions and burnt fingers. He strolled on toward the Tuileries, where
he had got into the way of sitting for hours at a time, looking across
the square at what had once been George’s window.

He was surprised to find the Rue de Rivoli packed with people; but his
only thought was the instinctive one of turning away to avoid them, and
he began to retrace his steps in the direction of the Louvre. Then at a
corner he paused again and looked back at the Place de la Concorde. It
was not curiosity that drew him, heaven knew?he would never again be
curious about anything?but he suddenly remembered the day three months
earlier when, leaning from George’s window in the hospital, he had said
to himself “By the time our first regiments arrive he’ll be up and
looking at them from here, or sitting with me over there on the
terrace”; and that decided him to turn back. It was as if he had felt
the pressure of George’s hand on his arm.

Though it was still so early he had some difficulty in pushing his way
through the throng. No seats were left on the terrace, but he managed to
squeeze into a corner near one of the great vases of the balustrade; and
leaning there, with the happy hubbub about him, he watched and waited.

Such a summer morning it was?and such a strange grave beauty had fallen
on the place! He seemed to understand for the first time?he who had
served Beauty all his days?how profoundly, at certain hours, it may
become the symbol of things hoped for and things died for. All those
stately spaces and raying distances, witnesses of so many memorable
scenes, might have been called together just as the setting for this one
event?the sight of a few brown battalions passing over them like a
feeble trail of insects.

Campton, with a vague awakening of interest, glanced about him, studying
the faces of the crowd. Old and young, infirm and healthy, civilians and
soldiers?ah, the soldiers!?all were exultant, confident, alive. Alive!
The word meant something new to him now?something so strange and
unnatural that his mind still hung and brooded over it. For now that
George was dead, by what mere blind propulsion did all these thousands
of human beings keep on mechanically living?

He became aware that a boy, leaning over intervening shoulders, was
trying to push a folded paper into his hand. On it was pencilled, in Mr.
Brant’s writing: “There will be a long time to wait. Will you take the
seat I have kept next to mine?” Campton glanced down the terrace, saw
where the little man sat at its farther end, and shook his head. Then
some contradictory impulse made him decide to get up, laboriously work
his halting frame through the crowd, and insert himself into the place
next to Mr. Brant. The two men nodded without shaking hands; after that
they sat silent, their eyes on the empty square. Campton noticed that
Mr. Brant wore his usual gray clothes, but with a mourning band on the
left sleeve. The sight of that little band irritated Campton....

There was, as Mr. Brant had predicted, a long interval of waiting; but
at length a murmur of jubilation rose far off, and gathering depth and
volume came bellowing and spraying up to where they sat. The square, the
Champs Elysees and all the leafy distances were flooded with it: it was
as though the voice of Paris had sprung up in fountains out of her
stones. Then a military march broke shrilly on the tumult; and there
they came at last, in a scant swaying line?so few, so new, so raw; so
little, in comparison with the immense assemblages familiar to the
place, so much in meaning and in promise.

“How badly they march?there hasn’t even been time to drill them
properly!” Campton thought; and at the thought he felt a choking in his
throat, and his sorrow burst up in him in healing springs....

                  *       *       *       *       *

It was after that day that he first went back to his work. He had not
touched paint or pencil since George’s death; now he felt the
inspiration and the power returning, and he began to spend his days
among the young American officers and soldiers, studying them, talking
to them, going about with them, and then hurrying home to jot down his
impressions. He had not, as yet, looked at his last study of George, or
opened the portfolio with the old sketches; if any one had asked him, he
would probably have said that they no longer interested him. His whole
creative faculty was curiously, mysteriously engrossed in the recording
of the young faces for whose coming George had yearned.

“It’s their marching so badly?it’s their not even having had time to be
drilled!” he said to Boylston, half-shamefacedly, as they sat together
one August evening in the studio window.

Campton seldom saw Boylston nowadays. All the young man’s time was taken
up by his job with the understaffed and inexperienced Military Mission;
but fagged as he was by continual overwork and heavy responsibilities,
his blinking eyes had at last lost their unsatisfied look, and his whole
busy person radiated hope and encouragement.

On the day in question he had turned up unexpectedly, inviting himself
to dine with Campton and smoke a cigar afterward in the quiet window
overhanging Paris. Campton was glad to have him there; no one could tell
him more than Boylston about the American soldiers, their numbers, the
accommodations prepared for their reception, their first contact with
the other belligerents, and their own view of the business they were
about. And the two chatted quietly in the twilight till the young man,
rising, said it was time to be off.

“Back to your shop?”

“Rather! There’s a night’s work ahead. But I’m as good as new after our
talk.”

Campton looked at him wistfully. “You know I’d like to paint you some
day.”

“Oh??” cried Boylston, suffused with blushes; and added with a laugh:
“It’s my uniform, not me.”

“Well, your uniform _is_ you?it’s all of you young men.”

Boylston stood in the window twisting his cap about undecidedly. “Look
here, sir?now that you’ve got back to work again??”

“Well?” Campton interrupted suspiciously.

The young man cleared his throat and spoke with a rush. “His mother
wants most awfully that something should be decided about the monument.”

“Monument? What monument? I don’t want my son to have a monument,”
Campton exploded.

But Boylston stuck to his point. “It’ll break her heart if something
isn’t put on the grave before long. It’s five months now?and they fully
recognize your right to decide??”

“Damn what they recognize! It was they who brought him to Paris; they
made him travel when he wasn’t fit; they killed him.”

“Well?supposing they did: judge how much more they must be suffering!”

“Let ’em suffer. He’s my son?my son. He isn’t Brant’s.”

“Miss Anthony thinks??”

“And he’s not hers either, that I know of!”

Boylston seemed to hesitate. “Well, that’s just it, isn’t it, sir?
You’ve had him; you have him still. Nobody can touch that fact, or take
it from you. Every hour of his life was yours. But they’ve never had
anything, those two others, Mr. Brant and Miss Anthony; nothing but a
reflected light. And so every outward sign means more to them. I’m
putting it badly, I know??”

Campton held out his hand. “You don’t mean to, I suppose. But better not
put it at all. Good night,” he said. And on the threshold he called out
sardonically: “And who’s going to pay for a monument, I’d like to know?”

                  *       *       *       *       *

A monument?they wanted a monument! Wanted him to decide about it, plan
it, perhaps design it?good Lord, he didn’t know! No doubt it all seemed
simple enough to them: anything did, that money could buy.... When he
couldn’t yet bear to turn that last canvas out from the wall, or look
into the old portfolio even.... Suffering, suffering! What did they any
of them know about suffering? Going over old photographs, comparing
studies, recalling scenes and sayings, discussing with some sculptor or
other the shape of George’s eyelids, the spring of his chest-muscles,
the way his hair grew and his hands moved?why, it was like digging him
up again out of that peaceful corner of the Neuilly cemetery where at
last he was resting, like dragging him back to the fret and the fever,
and the senseless roar of the guns that still went on.

And then: as he’d said to Boylston, who was to pay for their monument?
Even if the making of it had struck him as a way of getting nearer to
his boy, instead of building up a marble wall between them?even if the
idea had appealed to him, he hadn’t a penny to spare for such an
undertaking. In the first place, he never intended to paint again for
money; never intended to do anything but these gaunt and serious or
round and babyish young American faces above their stiff military
collars, and when their portraits were finished to put them away, locked
up for his own pleasure; and what he had earned in the last years was to
be partly for these young men?for their reading-rooms, clubs, recreation
centres, whatever was likely to give them temporary rest and solace in
the grim months to come; and partly for such of the proteges of “The
Friends of French Art” as had been deprived of aid under the new
management. Tales of private jealousy and petty retaliation came to
Campton daily, now that Mme. Beausite administered the funds; Adele
Anthony and Mlle. Davril, bursting with the wrongs of their pensioners,
were always appealing to him for help. And then, hidden behind these
more or less valid reasons, the old instinctive dread of spending had
reasserted itself, he couldn’t tell how or why, unless through some dim
opposition to the Brants’ perpetual outpouring: their hospitals, their
motors, their bribes, their orchids, and now their monument?_their_
monument!

He sought refuge from it all with his soldiers, haunting for hours every
day one of the newly-opened Soldiers’ and Sailors’ Clubs. Adele Anthony
had already found a job there, and was making a success of it. She
looked twenty years older since George was gone, but she stuck to her
work with the same humorous pertinacity; and with her mingled heartiness
and ceremony, her funny resuscitation of obsolete American slang, and
her ability to answer all their most disconcerting questions about Paris
and France (Montmartre included), she easily eclipsed the ministering
angels who twanged the home-town chord and called them “boys.”

The young men appeared to return Campton’s liking; it was as if they had
guessed that he needed them, and wanted to offer him their shy help. He
was conscious of something rather protecting in their attitude, of his
being to them a vague unidentified figure, merely “the old gentleman”
who was friendly to them; but he didn’t mind. It was enough to sit and
listen to their talk, to try and clear up a few of the countless puzzles
which confronted them, to render them such fatherly services as he
could, and in the interval to jot down notes of their faces?their
inexhaustibly inspiring faces. Sometimes to talk with them was like
being on the floor in George’s nursery, among the blocks and the tin
soldiers; sometimes like walking with young archangels in a cool empty
heaven; but wherever he was he always had the sense of being among his
own, the sense he had never had since George’s death.

To think of them all as George’s brothers, to study out the secret
likeness to him in their young dedicated faces: that was now his one
passion, his sustaining task; it was at such times that his son came
back and sat among them....

Gradually, as the weeks passed, the first of his new friends, officers
and soldiers, were dispersed throughout the training camps, and new
faces succeeded to those he had tried to fix on his canvas; an endless
line of Benny Upshers, baby-Georges, schoolboy Boylstons, they seemed to
be. Campton saw each one go with a fresh pang, knowing that every move
brought them so much nearer to the front, that ever-ravening and
inexorable front. They were always happy to be gone; and that only
increased his pain. Now and then he attached himself more particularly
to one of the young men, because of some look of the eyes or some turn
of the mind like George’s; and then the parting became anguish.

One day a second lieutenant came to the studio to take leave. He had
been an early recruit of Plattsburg, and his military training was so
far advanced that he counted on being among the first officers sent to
the fighting line. He was a fresh-coloured lad, with fair hair that
stood up in a defiant crest.

“There are so few of us, and there’s so little time to lose; they can’t
afford to be too particular,” he laughed.

It was just the sort of thing that George would have said, and the laugh
was like an echo of George’s. At the sound Campton suddenly burst into
tears, and was aware of his visitor’s looking at him with eyes of dismay
and compassion.

“Oh, don’t, sir, _don’t_,” the young man pleaded, wringing the painter’s
hand, and making what decent haste he could to get out of the studio.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Campton, left alone, turned once more to his easel. He sat down before a
canvas on which he had blocked out a group of soldiers playing cards at
their club; but after a stroke or two he threw aside his brush, and
remained with his head bowed on his hands, a lonely tired old man.

He had kept a cheerful front at his son’s going; and now he could not
say goodbye to one of these young fellows without crying. Well?it was
because he had no one left of his own, he supposed. Loneliness like his
took all a man’s strength from him....

The bell rang, but he did not move. It rang again; then the door was
pushed timidly open, and Mrs. Talkett came in. He had not seen her since
the day of George’s funeral, when he had fancied he detected her in a
shrunken black-veiled figure hurrying past in the meaningless line of
mourners.

In her usual abrupt fashion she began, without a greeting: “I’ve come to
say goodbye; I’m going to America.”

He looked at her remotely, hardly hearing what she said. “To America?”

“Yes; to join my husband.”

He continued to consider her in silence, and she frowned in her
perplexed and fretful way. “He’s at Plattsburg, you know.” Her eyes
wandered unseeingly about the studio. “There’s nothing else to do, is
there?now?here or anywhere? So I sail to-morrow; I mean to take a house
somewhere near him. He’s not well, and he writes that he misses me. The
life in camp is so unsuited to him??”

Campton still listened absently. “Oh, you’re right to go,” he agreed at
length, supposing it was what she expected of him.

“Am I?” She half-smiled. “What’s right and what’s wrong? I don’t know
any longer. I’m only trying to do what I suppose George would have
wanted.” She stood uncertainly in front of Campton. “All I _do_ know,”
she cried, with a sharp break in her voice, “is that I’ve never in my
life been happy enough to be so unhappy!” And she threw herself down on
the divan in a storm of desolate sobbing.

After he had comforted her as best he could, and she had gone away,
Campton continued to wander up and down the studio forlornly. That cry
of hers kept on echoing in his ears: “I’ve never in my life been happy
enough to be so unhappy!” It associated itself suddenly with a phrase of
Boylston’s that he had brushed away unheeding: “You’ve had your son?you
have him still; but those others have never had anything.”

Yes; Campton saw now that it was true of poor Madge Talkett, as it was
of Adele Anthony and Mr. Brant, and even in a measure of Julia. They had
never?no, not even George’s mother?had anything, in the close
inextricable sense in which Campton had had his son. And it was only
now, in his own hour of destitution, that he understood how much greater
the depth of their poverty had been. He recalled the frightened
embarrassed look of the young lieutenant whom he had discountenanced by
his tears; and he said to himself: “The only thing that helps is to be
able to do things for people. I suppose that’s why Brant’s always
trying??”

Julia too: it was strange that his thoughts should turn to her with such
peculiar pity. It was not because the boy had been born of her body:
Campton did not see her now, as he once had in a brief moment of
compassion, as the young mother bending illumined above her baby. He saw
her as an old empty-hearted woman, and asked himself how such an
unmanageable monster as grief was to fill the room up of her absent son.

What did such people as Julia do with grief, he wondered, how did they
make room for it in their lives, get up and lie down every day with its
taste on their lips? Its elemental quality, that awful sense it
communicated of a whirling earth, a crumbling Time, and all the cold
stellar spaces yawning to receive us?these feelings which he was
beginning to discern and to come to terms with in his own way (and with
the sense that it would have been George’s way too), these feelings
could never give their stern appeasement to Julia.... Her religion? Yes,
such as it was no doubt it would help; talking with the Rector would
help; giving more time to her church-charities, her wounded soldiers,
imagining that she was paying some kind of tax on her affliction. But
the vacant evenings, at home, face to face with Brant! Campton had long
since seen that the one thing which had held the two together was their
shared love of George; and if Julia discovered, as she could hardly fail
to do, how much more deeply Brant had loved her son than she had, and
how much more inconsolably he mourned him, that would only increase her
sense of isolation. And so, in sheer self-defence, she would gradually,
stealthily, fill up the void with the old occupations, with bridge and
visits and secret consultations at the dressmaker’s about the width of
crape on her dresses; and all the while the object of life would be gone
for her. Yes; he pitied Julia most of all.

But Mr. Brant too?perhaps in a different way it was he who suffered
most. For the stellar spaces were not exactly Mr. Brant’s native
climate, and yet voices would call to him from them, and he would not
know....

There were moments when Campton looked about him with astonishment at
the richness of his own denuded life; when George was in the sunset, in
the voices of young people, or in any trivial joke that father and son
would have shared; and other moments when he was nowhere, utterly lost,
extinct and irrecoverable; and others again when the one thing which
could have vitalized the dead business of living would have been to see
him shove open the studio door, stalk in, pour out some coffee for
himself in his father’s cup, and diffuse through the air the warm sense
of his bodily presence, the fresh smell of his clothes and his flesh and
his hair. But through all these moods, Campton began to see, there ran
the life-giving power of a reality embraced and accepted. George had
been; George was; as long as his father’s consciousness lasted, George
would be as much a part of it as the closest, most actual of his
immediate sensations. He had missed nothing of George, and here was his
harvest, his golden harvest.

Such states of mind were not constant with Campton; but more and more
often, when they came, they swept him on eagle wings over the next
desert to the next oasis; and so, gradually, the meaningless days became
linked to each other in some kind of intelligible sequence.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Boylston, after the talk which had so agitated Campton, did not turn up
again at the studio for some time; but when he next appeared the
painter, hardly pausing to greet him, began at once, as if they had just
parted: “That monument you spoke about the other day ... you know....”

Boylston glanced at him in surprise.

“If they want me to do it, I’ll do it,” Campton went on, jerking the
words out abruptly and walking away toward the window. He had not known,
till he began, that he had meant to utter them, or how difficult they
would be to say; and he stood there a moment struggling with the
unreasoning rebellious irritability which so often lay in wait for his
better impulses. At length he turned back, his hands in his pockets,
clinking his change as he had done the first time that Boylston had come
to him for help. “But as I plan the thing,” he began again, in a queer
growling tone, “it’s going to cost a lot?everything of the sort does
nowadays, especially in marble. It’s hard enough to get any one to do
that kind of work at all. And prices have about tripled, you know.”

Boylston’s eyes filled, and he nodded, still without speaking.

“That’s just what Brant’ll like though, isn’t it?” Campton said, with an
irrepressible sneer in his voice. He saw Boylston redden and look away,
and he too flushed to the forehead and broke off ashamed. Suddenly he
had the vision of Mr. Brant effacing himself at the foot of the hospital
stairs when they had arrived at Doullens; Mr. Brant drawing forth the
copy of the orderly’s letter in the dark fog-swept cloister; Mr. Brant
always yielding, always holding back, yet always remembering to do or to
say the one thing the father’s lacerated soul could bear.

“And he’s had nothing?nothing?nothing!” Campton thought.

He turned again to Boylston, his face still flushed, his lips twitching.
“Tell them?tell Brant?that I’ll design the thing; I’ll design it, and he
shall pay for it. He’ll want to?I understand that. Only, for God’s sake,
don’t let him come here and thank me?at least not for a long time!”

Boylston again nodded silently, and turned to go.

After he had gone the painter moved back to his long table. He had
always had a fancy for modelling?had always had lumps of clay lying
about within reach. He pulled out all the sketches of his son from the
old portfolio, spread them before him on the table, and began.

 PARIS, 1918?Saint Brice-Sous-Foret, 1922.


                                THE END

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. P. 62, changed “we was surprised” to “he was surprised”.
 2. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 3. Retained anachronistic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as
      printed.
 4. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 5. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Son at the Front, by Edith Wharton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SON AT THE FRONT ***

***** This file should be named 59437-0.txt or 59437-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/4/3/59437/

Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.





그림 형제 『동화집』 전체 우리말 옮김






글쓴이: 그림 형제
(그림 형제의 ‘그림’은 독일 성 씨임)
  

옮긴이: 마음 블로그
(네이버검색에서 "마음 블로그" 검색 ~_^)
 

“재미 삼아 읽어주세요~. 
정확한 해석 아닙니다.
정확하게 해석할 영어 실력 안 됨 ㅠ_ㅜ”



옮긴이의 말
- 그림 형제 『동화집』 전체 우리말 옮김

■ 들어가며
이번에는 ‘그림 형제’(독일 작가. ‘그림’은 독일성씨임. 형 1786~1859년. 동생 1808~1828년)의 『동화집』(펴냄 1812~1822년)을 한 번 해석해보겠습니다. 
많이들 읽어주세요~

애들레이드대학교(호주의 국립대학이름임)의 도서관(인터넷사이트)에 올라와 있는 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 경우입니다. (물론 그림 동화는 독일 동화이지만, 제가 독일어를 몰라서 ㅜ_ㅜ 영어로 번역된 걸 다시 우리 말로 옮겨요~)

아래는 관련 링크입니다.
『그림 형제 동화집』 링크 ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/  (검색일자 : 2016-10-31)

■ 목 차
(모두 210편의 동화가 수록되어 있음)

01. 개구리 왕자   02. 고양이와 쥐의 파트너십(동반자 관계)   03. 성모 마리아의 아이   04. 무서움을 배우러 나선 젊은이 이야기   05. 늑대와 일곱 마리의 어린 염소들   06. 충신 요하네스    07. 꽤 괜찮은 흥정   08. 경탄할 만한 연주가   09. 열두 오빠들   10. 건달들의 무리   11. 가엾은 오빠와 사랑스러운 누이   12. 라푼첼   13. 숲 속의 세 난쟁이   14. 실 잣는 세 여인네들   15. 헨젤과 그레텔   16. 세 장의 뱀 잎   17. 백사 (흰 뱀)   18. 지푸라기, 숯, 콩   19. 어부와 아내   20. 용감한 꼬마 재봉사   21. 신데렐라   22. 수수께끼   23. 생쥐, 새, 소시지   24. 홀레 할머니 (풍요의 여신)   25. 일곱 마리의 까마귀   26. 빨간 모자   27. 브레멘의 동물 음악대   28. 노래하는 뼈   29. 악마의 황금 머리카락 세 가닥   30. 이와 벼룩   31. 손 없는 소녀   32. 똑똑한 한스   33. 세 가지 언어   34. 똑똑한 엘시   35. 천국에 간 재단사   36. 요술 식탁, 황금 당나귀, 자루 속에 든 몽둥이   37. 엄지둥이   38. 여우 부인의 결혼식   39. 꼬마 요정들   40. 도둑 신랑   41. 코르베스 씨   42. 대부님   43. 트루데 아주머니   44. 대부가 된 저승사자   45. 엄지둥이의 여행   46. 피처의 새   47. 노간주나무   48. 늙은 개 술탄   49. 여섯 마리 백조   50. 잠자는 숲속의 미녀   51. 새가 주운 아이   52. 개똥지빠귀 수염 왕   53. 백설 공주   54. 배낭과 모자와 뿔피리   55. 룸펠슈틸츠헨   56. 연인 롤랑   57. 황금새   58. 개와 참새   59. 프레드릭과 캐서린 (프리더와 카터리스헨)   60. 두 형제   61. 농사꾼 나부랭이 (작은 농부)   62. 여왕벌   63. 세 개의 깃털   64. 황금 거위   65. 털북숭이 공주   66. 토끼의 신부   67. 열두 사냥꾼   68. 도둑과 도둑 선생   69. 요린데와 요링겔   70. 세 행운아   71. 여섯 사나이의 모험   72. 늑대와 사람   73. 늑대와 여우   74. 여우와 사촌   75. 여우와 고양이   76. 카네이션 (패랭이꽃)   77. 영리한 그레텔   78. 노인과 손자   79. 물의 요정   80. 암탉의 죽음   81. 웃기는 친구 루스티히   82. 노름꾼 헨젤   83. 운 좋은 한스   84. 한스, 결혼하다   85. 황금 아이들   86. 여우와 거위들   87. 가난뱅이와 부자   88. 노래하며 팔짝거리는 종달새   89. 거위치는 소녀(공주)   90. 어린 거인   91. 땅속 요정   92. 황금산의 임금님   93. 까마귀   94. 농부의 영리한 딸   95. 늙은 힐데브란트   96. 세 마리 작은 새   97. 생명의 물   98. 척척박사   99. 유리병 속의 도깨비   100. 악마의 숯검댕이 동생   101. 곰 가죽   102. 굴뚝새와 곰   103. 달콤한 오트밀 (맛있는 죽)   104. 영리한 사람들   105. 두꺼비 이야기   106. 불쌍한 방앗간 젊은이와 고양이   107. 두 나그네   108. 고슴도치 한스   109. 수의   110. 가시덤불 속의 유대인   111. 솜씨 좋은 사냥꾼   112. 하늘나라에서 가져온 도리깨   113. 두 왕의 아이들   114. 영리한 꼬마 재단사   115. 빛나는 햇빛이 밝혀주리   116. 파란 불꽃 (푸른 등잔불)   117. 고집불통 아이   118. 세 군의관   119. 일곱 명의 슈바벤 사람   120. 세 직공   121. 겁 없는 왕자   122. 당나귀 양배추   123. 숲 속의 노파   124. 세 형제   125. 악마와 악마의 할머니   126. 성실한 페레난트와 불성실한 페레난트   127. 무쇠 난로   128. 게으른 실 잣는 여인   129. 재주가 좋은 네 형제   130. 한눈이, 두눈이, 세눈이   131. 예쁜 카트리넬리에와 핍 팝 폴트리   132. 여우와 말   133. 춤추는 열두 공주 (춤추느라 다 떨어진 구두)   134. 여섯 명의 하인   135. 하얀 신부와 까만 신부   136. 무쇠 한스   137. 세 명의 검은 공주   138. 크노이스트와 세 아들   139. 브라켈에서 온 아가씨   140. 종 (하인이나 하녀)   141. 어린 양과 작은 물고기   142. 지멜리 산   143. 여행   144. 당나귀 왕자   145. 은혜를 모르는 아들   146. 커다란 무   147. 젊어진 노인   148. 하느님의 동물과 악마의 동물   149. 닭장의 홰   150. 거지 할머니   151. 게으름뱅이 세 아들   152. 게으른 열두 하인   153. 양치기 소년   154. 은화가 된 별   155. 숨겨놓은 동전   156. 신붓감 고르기   157. 아마 부스러기 (부지런한 하녀)   158. 아빠 참새와 새끼 참새 네 마리   159. 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅에 관한 이야기   160. 디트마르쉬의 허풍   161. 수수께끼 이야기   162. 흰눈이와 빨간 장미   163. 영리한 하인   164. 유리관   165. 게으름뱅이 하인츠   166. 괴물새 그리핀   167. 힘센 한스   168. 천국에 간 농부   169. 말라깽이 리제   170. 숲 속의 오두막집   171. 기쁨도 함께 슬픔도 함께 (동고동락)   172. 굴뚝새   173. 가자미   174. 알락해오라기와 후투티 (←새 이름들임)   175. 부엉이   176. 달   177. 수명   178. 저승사자   179. 구둣방 주인 송곳 씨   180. 샘물가에서 거위치는 아가씨   181. 이브의 다양한 자녀들   182. 못 속의 물의 요정   183. 난쟁이의 선물   184. 거인과 재봉사   185. 못   186. 무덤에 누운 불쌍한 소년   187. 진짜 신부   188. 토끼와 고슴도치   189. 물렛가락과 북과 바늘   190. 농부와 악마   191. 식탁 위의 빵 부스러기   192. 바다 민달팽이   193. 최고의 도둑   194. 곡식의 이삭   195. 무덤   196. 늙은 링크랑크   197. 수정 구슬   198. 말렌 아가씨   199. 물소 가죽 장화   200. 황금 열쇠   201. 숲 속의 성 요셉   202. 열두 사도   203. 장미   204. 가난과 겸손이 천국으로 이끄나니   205. 하느님의 음식   206. 푸른 나뭇가지 세 개   207. 성모 마리아의 작은 잔   208. 나이 드신 어머님   209. 하늘나라의 결혼 잔치   210. 개암나무 가지





1. 개구리 왕자





옛날 옛적에 소망을 이루어 주는 힘이 여전히 통했던 때에, 딸들이 모두 예쁜 왕이 한 분 살고 계셨어요.
특히나 막내공주님이 아주 예뻤는데요, 어찌나 아름다운지, 해도 그녀의 얼굴에 햇볕을 비출 때마다 감탄을 하곤 하였더랬죠.
왕의 성은 울창한 숲에 둘러싸여 있었어요.
숲에 있는 나이 많은 라임 나무 아래에 우물이 하나 있었어요.
화창한 날에, 막내공주님께서 숲으로 놀러 나와 시원한 분수 옆에 앉았어요.
그녀는 따분할 땐 황금 공을 가져와 높이 던졌다가 다시 잡곤 했지요.
황금 공놀이는 그녀가 가장 좋아하는 놀이었어요. 
그러다 우연히 공주의 작은 손으로 떠받치고 있던 황금 공이 바닥으로 떨어져 곧장 우물 속으로 굴러 들어갔지 뭐예요.
공주님이 다급히 눈으론 공을 쫓았지만 허사였어요.
우물은 꽤 깊었어요. 바닥이 보이지 않을 정도로요.
이 일로 공주님이 울기 시작했어요. 소리 내 울고 더 크게 소리 내 울었어요. 마음의 안정을 찾을 수가 없었어요.
그렇게 눈물을 글썽이고 있는데 누군가가 그녀에게 이렇게 말하는 거예요.
“누가 널 괴롭히니, 공주야? 네 모습을 보고 돌도 눈물을 뚝뚝 흘리겠다.”
공주가 목소리가 들려온 쪽을 돌아보니 이게 뭔가요, 세상에나 똥똥하고 못생긴 개구리 한 마리가 물 위로 고개를 쭉 내밀고 있지 뭐예요.
“아아! 넌 헤엄을 치지?”라며 공주가 말했어요. “우물로 떨어진 내 황금 공 때문에 울고 있었던 거야.”
“울지 말고, 뚝,”라며 개구리가 대답했어요. “내가 널 도울 수 있겠는데, 그렇지만 내가 네 공을 다시 주워주면 넌 내게 무얼 보답으로 줄래?”
“네가 가지고 싶은 건 다, 착한 개구리야,”라며 공주가 말했어요… “내 옷이나, 내 진주나 보석, 아님 내가 지금 쓰고 있는 황금 ‘관’(머리에 쓰는 금관)도 네가 원하면 줄게.”
개구리가 대답했어요.
“난 네 옷, 진주, 보석이나 황금 관(=금관)엔 관심 없어. 날 좋아해주고 네 친구로 삼아죠 놀이 친구 말이야. 그리고 네 예쁜 식사 테이블 옆에 앉혀주고, 네 예쁜 황금접시에서 식사를 하게 해주고, 네 예쁜 컵으로 마실 수 있게 해줘, 그리고 네 예쁜 침대에서 재워져… 만약 내가 이걸 약속해준다면 내가 아래로 내려가 네 황금 공을 가지고 올라올게.”
“응 그래,”라며 공주가 말했어요. “만약 내 공만 다시 가져다준다면, 네가 원하는 것들을 다 들어줄게.”
하지만 공주는 속으론 생각했어요.
‘흥 놀고 있네, 개구리 주제에! 넌 그냥 다른 개구리들처럼 개골개골 울며 물에서나 살아. 네까짓 게 어떻게 인간의 친구가 될 수 있단 말이니!’
어째든 개구리는 이런 약속을 받고서 고개를 물속으로 넣곤 잠수를 했어요.
잠시 후 개구리가 한 입 가득 공을 물고서 물 위로 올라왔어요.
개구리가 잔디밭 위로 공을 던졌어요.
자신의 예쁜 놀이 공을 한 번 더 보자 공주는 뛸 듯이 기뻤어요. 
그래서 공을 줍곤 잽싸게 도망가 버렸어요.
“기다려, 기다려,”라며 개구리가 말했어요. “나를 데리고 가야지. 난 너처럼 달릴 수 없다구.”
하지만 개구리가 개골개골, 개골개골 외쳐대는 소리가 공주를 따라잡을 만큼 컸다고 한들 과연 도움이 되었을까요?
아니죠, 공주가 그 말을 들어줄 리가 없죠.
실제로도 공주는 잽싸게 집으로 돌아온 다음에, 다시 자신의 우물로 돌아가야 했던 불쌍한 개구리 일랑은 완전히 잊고 말았어요.
다음날 공주가 왕과 신하들과 함께 식탁에 앉아 자신의 예쁜 황금 접시에 담긴 음식을 먹고 있는데, 대리석 계단을 오르는 소리가, 첨벙 첨벙, 첨벙 첨벙, 하고서 울리며 다가오는 것이다. 
그 소리가 계단 꼭대기까지 다다르자, 누군가가 문을 똑똑 노크하며 소리쳤다. 
“공주, 막내 공주, 저에요, 문을 열어주세요.” 
누군지 보려고 달려간 공주가 문을 열었을 때 어마나 세상에 문 앞에 어제 그 개구리가 앉아 있지 뭐예요.
그래서 공주가 문을 사정없이 닫아버리고는 허둥대며 다시 자리로 와 식사를 계속했지만, 공주도 너무나도 놀란 건 사실이었어요.
누가 봐도 공주의 얼굴이 붉으락푸르락한 게 보였어요.
그래서 왕이 말했어요.
“딸애야, 왜 그러니? 문 앞에서 너를 데려가려는 거인이라도 본 게냐?”
“아, 아냐,”라며 공주가 말했어요. “거인이 아니라 구역질나는 개구리 한 마리야.”
“개구리가 왜 너를 부른단 말이냐?”
“아 그게, 아빠, 내가 어제 숲에 있는 우물가에 앉아 공을 만지작거리다 황금 공을 우물 속에 떨어뜨리고 말았거든. 그래서 울고 있는데 개구리가 공을 다시 갖다 주었어. 그러면서 우기길, 자기를 내 친구로 삼아 달라고 약속해달란 거야. 하지만 개구린 물에서 살잖아! 그런데 지금 저렇게 문 앞에 있네, 들여보내 달라며.”
그러는 사이에 개구리가 똑똑 하며 두 번째 노크를 하며 소리치고 있었어요.

“공주님! 막내공주님!
제게 문을 열어주시어요!
어제 시원한 분수대 옆 물가에서

제게 하신 말씀을 그새 잊으신 건 아니겠죠?
공주님, 막내공주님!
어서 문을 열어주시어요!” 

그러자 왕이 말씀하셨어요.
“약속은 지키라고 있는 게다. 어서 가서 그 분을 들이 거라.”
공주가 마지못해 가, 문을 열어주자, 개구리는 폴짝 폴짝 뛰어 안으로 들어와선 공주님 뒤를 쫓았어요, 한 발짝 한 발짝, 드디어 공주 의자에까지 왔어요. 거기서 개구리가 소리쳤어요.
“당신 옆으로 올려줘요.”
공주가 머뭇거리자, 마침내 왕께서 그리하라 이르셨어요.
공주의 의자에 일단 한 번 착석을 하자, 개구리가 이번엔 식탁 위로 가고 싶어 했어요.
식탁 위에서 이제 개구리가 말했어요.
“자, 당신의 예쁜 황금 접시에 담긴 음식을 우리가 함께 먹을 수 있도록 그 황금 접시를 더 내 쪽으로 밀어줘요.”
공주가 그리 했어요, 하지만 속으론 절대 그리 하고 싶어 하지 않는 눈치였다는 건 당연지사.
개구리는 자신이 먹는 걸 즐거워했어요.
하지만 공주는 음식 한 입 한 입마다 정말이지 숨이 막혀 죽을 지경이었어요.
마침내 개구리가 말했어요.
“이제 만족하게 먹었으니. 좀 피곤한데, 나를 당신의 예쁜 방으로 데려가 주고 당신의 예쁜 비단 침대에 자리를 펴줘요, 우리 같이 누워 자자고요.”
공주가 급기야 눈물을 터뜨렸어요.
차가운 개구리를 만지고 싶지 않거니와 자신의 예쁘고 깨끗한 이쁜이 침대에서 재우기도 넘 싫었기 때문이죠.
하지만 왕께서 역정을 내시면 말씀하셨어요.
“너를 도와주신 분께 이 무슨 무례란 말이냐.”
그래서 공주는 개구리를 두 손가락으로 쥐고서 2층으로 가 방구석에 두었어요.
하지만 공주가 침대에 앉자 개구리가 공주에게로 기어오며 말하길,
“나 피곤해, 네 옆에서 자고 싶어, 나를 들어 올려줘, 그렇지 않음 네 아버지께 다 이를 거야.”
그 바람에 공주의 참아왔던 화가 폭발하고 말았어요.
개구리를 집어다 벽에다 사정없이 내던지고 말았어요.
“자, 이제 좀 조용해지시겠지, 이 가증스런 개구리야.”라며 공주가 말했어요.
그런데 바닥으로 떨어진 개구리가 더 이상 개구리가 아닌 거예요.
어머나, 세상에 개구리는 어디가고 웬 아름답고 상냥한 눈동자를 지닌 왕자님이 서 계시지 뭐예요.
왕의 말씀에 따라 왕자는 이제 공주의 연인이자 남편이 되었어요.
그러고 나서 왕자는 공주에게 자신이 어떻게 하여 사악한 마녀의 마법에 빠지게 되었는지, 그리고 그 마녀가 공주 외에는 아무도 자신(=왕자)을 우물에서 구하지 못하게 했는지를 말해주었어요. 
그 다음날 공주와 왕자는 함께 왕자의 왕국으로 갈 예정이었어요.
그리고 같이 잠을 잤어요, 다음날 아침 눈부신 햇살이 그들을 깨우자, 8마리의 흰 말들이 끄는 마차가 도착했는데, 말 머리엔 흰색 타조 깃털들이 꽂아져 있었고요 금줄로 치렁치렁 몸을 감싼 말들이었어요.
말들 바로 뒷편엔 왕자님의 충실한 종인 ‘헨리’(남자이름)가 타고 있었어요. 
자신의 주인(=왕자님)이 개구리로 변해버리자 너무도 비참했던 충실한 ‘헨리’(남자이름. 왕자의 종)는 비탄과 슬픔에 자신의 심장이 터져버리는 것을 방지하기 위해 가슴에 ‘철대’(철로 된 테두리) 세 개를 둘러매었더랬어요.
왕자님 부부를 왕자님의 왕국으로 태우고 갈 마차를 끌고 온 충실한 헨리는 두 분을 도와 마차에 태워드린 훈 다시 뒷좌석으로 가 앉았어요.
왕자님이 사악한 마법에서 해방되신 게 ‘헨리’(왕자님의 종)는 너무도 기뻤답니다.
마차를 타고 가는 도중에 중간 중간 왕자님은 자신의 뒤에서 무엇인가가 마치 부서질 듯 갈라지는 소리를 들었어요.
그래서 뒤돌아보며 소리쳤어요.
“헨리(왕자님의 종), 마차가 부서지고 있어.” 
“아닙니다, 주인님, 마차가 아니에요. 제 가슴에서 나는 악기 소리에요. 왕자님이 개구리로 변해 우물 속에 갇히셨을 때 제가 슬픔을 참지 못하고 제 가슴에 둘러맨 쇠테(철로 만든 띠)에요.”
마차가 가는 도중에 또다시 그리고 한 번 더 또다시 뭔가가 와장창 깨지는 소리가 났고, 그럴 때마다 왕자님은 이번엔 정말이지 마차가 박살나고 있다고 생각했어요.
ㅋㅋㅋ 하지만 그건 자신의 주인(=왕자님)이 마법에서 풀려나 행복한 것이 너무도 기뻤던 충직한 종인 ‘헨리’(남자이름. 왕자님의 종)의 심장이 용솟음치면서 쇠테(철로 만든 띠)를 망치처럼 두드리는 바람에 내는 소리였답니다.

(끝)

동화 「개구리 왕자」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「개구리 왕자」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter1.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥








2. 고양이와 쥐의 파트너십(동반자관계)


쥐를 친구로 된 어떤 고양이가 살고 있었다. 
고양이는 자신이 쥐에 대해 사랑과 우정을 느낀다고 말하였다. 
결국 쥐도 그들이 함께 사는 것에 동의하였다. 
“하지만 우린 겨울 식량을 준비해야해, 그렇지 않음 굶주릴 테니까.”라고 고양이가 말을 했다. “그리고 너 쥐는 특히 더 조심해야해. 사방에 위험투성이라, 어느 날 쥐덫에 걸릴지도 모를 일이니까.” 
쥐는 고양이의 좋은 충고를 따라 돼지비계가 가득 든 항아리를 준비했다. 
하지만 과연 이걸 어디다 보관할지 그들은 몰랐다. 
결국 오랜 숙고 끝에 고양이가 말했어요.
“교회만한 곳이 없지. 거긴 두면 아무도 훔쳐갈 생각을 못할 거 아냐. 성찬대(=제단) 밑에 두자 그리고 정말 필요한 때가 올 때까진 손대지 말자.”
그래서 항아리는 안전하게 교회 성찬대 밑에 보관되었습니다.
그런데 오래지 않아 고양이는 그게 너무 입에 대고 싶은 거예요.
그래서 쥐에게 말했어요.
“생쥐야, 네게 할 중요한 말이 있어. 내 사촌의 아기가 이번에 세례를 받는데 나보고 대모(여성 후견인)를 맡아 달라네. 왜 있지, 갈색 점들이 숭숭 박혀 있는 흰 고양이 말이야. 세례용 물을 담은 큰 그릇 위로 내가 아기를 붙잡아주기로 했거든. 그럼 나는 가 볼테니, 넌 집 잘 지키고 있으렴.”
“그래, 그래,”라며 쥐가 대답했어요. “좋고 말고, 가서 맛난 거 먹거든 내 생각이나 해줘, 캬~ 나도 세례식에서 사용하는 달콤한 레드와인 한 모금 마셔봤음 소원이 없겠다.” 
하지만 그건 모두 거짓말이었어요.
고양이에겐 사촌이 한 명도 없었거든요. 또한 대모(여성 후견인)가 되어달라는 요청도 업었고 말이에요.
고양이는 곧장 교회로 가 돼지비계가 든 항아리를 거머쥐곤 핥아먹기 시작해 순식간에 항아리 윗부분에 있던 돼지비계들을 죄다 핥아먹어 버렸어요.
그런 다음 마을의 지붕들 위를 유유히 거닐며 햇살에 팔다리를 쭉 펴고 누워있다 돼지비계 생각이 날 때마다 입술을 핥았어요. 
그러다 저녁 무렵에 집으로 돌아갔지요. 
“어이, 왔구나,”라며 쥐가 말했어요. “오늘 즐거웠겠지.”
“다 잘 됐어.”라고 고양이가 말했어요.
“그래 아기 이름을 뭘로 지은 거야?”
“핥다 말았다!”라며 고양이가 아주 쿨하게 말했어요. 
“핥다 말았다라고!”라며 쥐가 큰소리로 말했어요. “그 참 요상한 이름이네, 너희 고양이들에겐 친숙한 이름이니?”
“그 이름이 의미하는 바는,”라며 고양이가 말했어요. “대자녀(세례식 받는 아이)의 이름으로 어떤 이름도 바늘도둑보단 낫다는 거야.”
오래지 않아 고양이가 또 돼지비계가 든 항아리 생각으로 가득했어요.
고양이가 쥐에게 말했어요.
“부탁이 있는데 말이야, 네가 한 번 더 집을 지켜줘야겠어. 대모(여성 후견인)가 되어달라는 부탁을 또 받았거든. 이번엔 아기 목에 흰 반지를 끼우는 역할이야. 거절할 수 없어서 말이야.”
착한 쥐는 동의했어요.
하지만 고양이는 마을의 담들 뒤로 기어 올라가 교회로 들어가 게걸스럽게 돼지비계가 든 항아리의 반을 먹어치어 버렸어요.
“야 친구 몰래 먹는 이 맛이 꿀맛인걸,”라며 오늘 자신이 한 일에 대단히 만족해하며 고양이가 말했어요.
고양이가 집으로 돌아왔을 때 쥐가 물었어요.
“그래 아기 세례명은 뭘로 지었데?”
“‘반 다 먹다’야.”라며 고양이가 대답했어요.
“‘반 다 먹다’라고! 뭔 소리야? 세상에 그런 이름을 세례명으로 지어주는 부모도 있어. 교회 달력에도 안 나오는 이름이란 데에 내기를 해도 좋아!”
고양이의 입이 다시 돼지비계를 좀 더 핥고 싶어 군침으로 잘잘 흐르기 시작했어요.
“좋은 일은 세 번 연속 온다고 하지 않니.”라며 고양이가 말했어요. “대모(세례식 때 아기의 여성후견인)로 서 달라는 요청을 또 받았거든. 아기는 완전 새까만데, 하얀 발을 가진 애야. 우리 친지들 중에서도 몸에 흰 털 하나 없는 애가 태어난 건 몇 년 만에 처음이야. 그러니 내가 갈 수 있게 해줘, 가도 돼지?”
“‘핥다 말다!’ ‘반 다 먹다!’”라며 쥐가 대답했어요. “어째 이름들이 이상한데, 자꾸 이상한 생각이 나로 하여금 들게 만들어.”
“짙은 회색 털외투를 입고 긴 꼬리를 하고서,”라며 고양이가 말했어요. “네가 집에만 앉아 있다 보니 그런 요상한 생각들이 드는 걸 거야. 그게 다 낮에 네가 외출을 안 해서야.”
고양이가 외출한 동안, 쥐는 방을 깨끗이 치우고 정리정돈을 했어요.
하지만 탐욕스러운 고양이는, 쥐가 집 청소를 하는 사이에, 돼지비계가 든 항아리를 죄다 먹어치워 버렸답니다.
“싹 다 먹었다, 이제야 마음이 좀 놓이네.”라며 고양이는 혼잣말을 했어요.
돼지비계로 배를 가득 채운 상태로 밤이 되어서야 고양이는 돌아왔어요.
얼굴을 다시 보자 말자 쥐가 “이번엔 아기 이름이 뭐였는데?”라고 물었어요.
“지난 번 이름들과 같아,”라며 고양이가 말했어요. “이번엔 ‘싹 다 비워’야.”
“‘싹 다 비워’라고,”라며 쥐가 소리쳤어요. “이름들이 죄다 너무 의심스러운데! 난 그런 이름을 성경에서도 본 적이 없어. ‘싹 다 비워’라. 무슨 의미일까?”
쥐는 고개를 흔들며 몸을 동그랗게 말고 있더니 스르르 잠이 들고 말았어요.
이후 아무도 고양이보고 ‘대모’(세례식 때 여성후견인)가 되어 달라 초대하지 않았어요.
하지만 겨울이 되어 야외에서 더 이상 먹을 걸 찾을 수 없게 되자, 쥐는 돼지비계 항아리를 생각해내곤 말했어요.
“가자 고양이야, 이런 때를 대비해서 돼지비계가 든 항아리를 보관해두었잖니…. 이제부턴 불행 끝 행복 시작이야.”
“그래.”라며 고양이가 대답했어요. “입맛을 다실 때가 좋은 거지.”
그들은 출발했어요.
하지만 교회에 도착해서 보니 항아리를 분명 그 자리에 놓여 있는데 돼지비계는 온데간데없이 사라지고 없었어요.
“아하!”라며 쥐가 탄식하며 말했어요. “이제야 그동안 뭔 일이 있었던 건지 알겠다, 그동안 네가 한 소리들도 죄다 뭔 소린지 이해했고! 네가 진정한 친구라고! 넌 있지도 않은 ‘대모’(세례식 때 여성 후견인) 행세를 하며 돼지비계를 죄다 먹어치우고 있었던 거야. 첫 번째는 ‘핥다 말았고!’, 그 다음엔 ‘반 다 먹고’, 그런 다음엔…,”
“입 다물어,”라며 고양이가 소리쳤어요. “만약 이 이후로 한 마디만 더 하면 너도 먹어버릴 거니까.”
그건 “싹 다 먹었지.”라는 말이 이미 불쌍한 쥐의 입에서 내뱉어진 이후였어요.
쥐가 그 말을 내뱉자마자 고양이는 얼른 쥐에게 달려들어 쥐를 붙잡고는 한 입에 삼켜버렸어요.
진실로, 이게 바로 세상의 이치랍니다.

(끝)
동화 「고양이와 쥐의 파트너십」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「고양이와 쥐의 파트너십」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter2.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



3. 성모 마리아의 아이


거대한 숲에서 아내와 함께 힘들게 살고 있는 나무꾼이 하나 있었습니다.
그들에게는 세 살 배기 어린 딸이 하나 있었습니다.
하지만 그들은 너무도 가난했기 때문에 양식을 구할 길이 없어 딸아이를 어찌 먹여살릴지 앞이 깜깜했습니다. 
그러던 어느 날 나무꾼이 우울하게 숲으로 나무 하러 갔는데, 잠시 나무를 베고 있자니, 갑자기 눈앞에 빛나는 별들로 이루어진 왕관을 머리 위에 쓴 아름답고 키가 큰 여인 한 명이 나타나 이렇게 나무꾼에게 말하는 것입니다.
“나는 아기 예수의 어머니인 동정녀 성모 마리아다. 네 생활이 가난해 딱하니, 네 아이를 내게 데려오려무나, 그럼 내가 그 애를 데려다 키워주며 어미처럼 보살펴주겠다.” 
나무꾼이 그 말에 따라 아이를 데려와 성모 마리아께 건네자 성모 마리아께서 아이를 데리고 하늘나라로 올라가셨어요.
아이는 그곳에서 편히 잘 살았어요. 설탕 케이크도 먹고요, 단 우유도 마시고요, 금으로 만든 옷도 입고요, 아기 천사들과 놀고요.
그녀가 14살이 되던 날, 성모 마리아께서 그녀를 부르시어 말씀하시길,
“얘야, 내가 긴 여행을 하려 하니, 여기 이 하늘나라의 13개의 열쇠를 가지고 있거라. 이들 중 12개의 열쇠는 네 마음대로 열어보고 방안에 든 영예로움을 봐도 된다만, 하지만 13번째 열쇠는 절대 열어봐선 안 된다. 그 방문을 여는 것을 경계해라, 그렇지 않음 넌 네 스스로를 비참함으로 몰아갈 것이다.”  
소녀는 그 말씀에 따르리라 약속드렸어요.
성모 마리아께서 가고 나자, 소녀는 하늘나라의 왕국에 있는 방들을 살피기 시작했어요.
매일 방 하나씩을 열어봤어요.
그러다 12개의 방문을 다 열어봤지요.
각 방들엔 찬란한 빛이 방 가운데를 비추는 가운데 ‘사도’(예수님의 12제자)들이 앉아 계셨어요.
소녀는 그 존엄과 빛남을 보는 게 즐거웠어요.
같이 동행한 아기 천사들도 너무너무 좋아했고요.
이제 금지된 문만 남았어요.
그 문 뒤에 무엇이 있을지 소녀는 너무너무 궁금해졌어요.
그래서 아기 천사들에게 말했어요.
“많이 열어보지 않고, 안으로 들어가지 않고, 그냥 문만 열게. 열린 문틈 사이로 살짝 들어다만 볼게.”
“안 돼 안 돼.”라며 아기 천사들이 말했어요. “그건 죄 짓는 거야. 성모 마리아님께서 그건 네 불행을 야기할 수 있다며 금지하신 거잖아.”  
그러자 소녀가 입을 닫았어요.
하지만 가슴 속 욕망은 가만있지 않고 그녀의 마음을 갉아먹고 막 괴롭혀 한시도 쉬지 않게 했어요.
한 번은 아기 천사들이 모두 놀러간 사이, 소녀가 생각했어요.
“나만 남았네, 살짝만 엿봐야지. 내가 그런다고 아무도 모를 거잖아.”
소녀가 열쇠를 찾아 손에 넣었어요. 
열쇠를 자물쇠에 넣고 살짝 돌리자 자물쇠가 돌아갔어요.
그 반동으로 방문이 열렸어요. 
거기에 불길과 같은 휘황찬란한 빛 한가운데에 삼위일체의 하느님께서 앉아 계신게 보였어요.
소녀는 거기 잠시 머물며 놀라며 바라봤어요.
그때 소녀가 자신의 손가락으로 그 빛을 조금 만져보았아요.
그러자 그녀의 손가락이 금빛으로 변했어요.
그 즉시 큰 두려움이 밀려온 소녀가 방문을 급하게 쾅 닫곤 도망쳤어요.
두려움은 소녀가 감당할 수 있는 게 아니었어요.
게다가 손가락도 여전히 금빛으로 남아 지워지지 않았고요.
아무리 문질러도 금빛이 씻겨나가지 않았던 거예요.
머지않아 성모 마리아께서 여행에서 돌아오셨어요.
성모 마리아께서 소녀를 앞으로 부르시어 하늘나라의 열쇠들을 달라 말씀하셨어요.
소녀가 열쇠 뭉치를 드릴 때, 성모 마리아께서 소녀의 눈을 보시곤 말씀하셨어요.
“13번째 방문을 열지 않았지?”
“네.”라며 소녀가 대답했어요.
그러자 성모 마리아께서 소녀의 가슴에 손을 얹으시어 심장이 어찌 뛰나 보시곤 대번에 소녀가 자신의 말을 어기고 그 방문을 열어봤다는 것을 인지하셨어요. 
성모 마리아께서 한 번 더 말씀하셨어요.
“그 방문을 연 적이 없니?”
“예.”라고 소녀가 두 번째로 말했어요. 
그때 성모 마리아께서, 하늘나라의 불에 닿아 금빛으로 변한 소녀의 손가락을 보시곤 이 아이가 죄를 지었다 더 잘 아셨어요.
그래서 세 번째로 말씀하셨어요.
“정말 연 적이 없니?”
“네.”라고 소녀가 세 번째로 말했어요.
그러자 성모 마리아께서 말씀하셨어요.
“넌 내 말을 어겼다. 게다가 지금 거짓말까지 하고 있다. 너는 더는 하늘나라에서 살 자격이 없다.”
그러자 소녀는 깊은 잠에 빠져 들었어요.
소녀가 깨어보니 자신이 대지 위에 누어있는 거예요. 그것도 거친 들판 한 가운데요.
소녀는 울고 싶었지만 소리가 나오지 않았어요.
소녀는 일어나 도망치고 싶었어요.
하지만 아무리 발버둥 쳐도 도저히 여자 힘으론 뚫을 수 없는 두꺼운 가시울타리 때문에 돌아와야 했어요.
그녀가 갇혀 있는 이 볼모지의 땅엔 나이 들어 속이 빈 나무 한 그루가 서 있었어요.
소녀는 이 속이 빈 나무를 집으로 삼아야했어요.
밤이 오자 소녀는 그 나무에 기어들어가 잠을 청했어요. 
나무는 또한 폭풍과 비로부터도 안식처가 되어 주었어요.
하지만 거친 들판에서의 삶이란 역시 비참하기 마련이었고, 자신이 하늘나라에서 누린 행복과 아기천사들과 뛰어놀던 것이 떠오를 때면 소녀는 뼈저리게 울곤 했답니다. 
그녀의 유일한 식량은 나무뿌리들과 야생열매들이었어요.
왜냐하면 거친 들판에서 구할 수 있는 게 그것뿐이었기 때문이죠.
가을이 되어 나무 열매와 낙엽들이 떨어지자 그녀는 그것들을 주어다 구멍을 채웠어요.
가을에 주운 나무열매들이 겨울식량이 된 거죠.
눈이 내리고 얼음이 얼자, 그녀는 동상에 걸리지 않으려는 불쌍한 어린 동물마냥 낙엽들 사이로 기어들어야했어요. 
머지않아 그녀의 옷은 다 찢어지고 그나마 붙어 있던 옷도 떨어질 때로 떨어져 나갈 떄쯤, 다행히 다시 햇살이 따뜻해져서 그녀도 나와 나무 앞에 앉았어요.
그녀의 기다란 머리카락들이 외투 마냥 양쪽 갈래로 그녀를 덮고 있었어요.
여러 해를 그렇게 그녀는 현세의 고통과 비참함을 맛보며 살았어요.
어느 날 나무들에 새싹이 돋아날 무렵, 이 지역의 왕이 숲으로 사냥을 나왔어요.
왕이 노루를 뒤쫓아 왔어요.
노루가 울창하게 뒤덮인 숲으로 도망가자 왕은 말에서 내려 가시나무들을 산산조각내고 칼로 길을 냈어요.
왕이 마침내 가시나무 수풀 사이를 뚫고 나오니, 나무 아래에 놀랄 만큼 아름다운 웬 처녀 한 명이 앉아 있는 거예요.
그 처녀는 자신의 발까지 내려오는 금발머리에 휘감겨 있는 상태였죠.
너무 충격을 받아 서 있던 왕이 그 처녀에게 다가가 말했어요.
“당신은 누구요? 누군데 이 거친 들판 여기에 앉아 계신 거요?”
하지만 그녀는 어떤 말도 하지 않았어요. 왜냐하면 입을 열 수 업었기 때문이죠.
왕이 계속 말했어요.
“나와 함께 내 성으로 가시겠소?”  
그때 그녀가 고개를 살짝 끄떡였어요.
왕이 그녀를 팔로 안아 들어 말에 태운 다음 자신과 함께 성으로 돌아갔어요.
으리으리한 성으로 돌아온 다음 왕은 그녀에게 아름다운 의상들을 입혔어요.
그 옷들이 그녀를 더욱 아름답게 해주었답니다.
비록 그녀가 말을 못 했지만 너무도 아름답고 매력적이라 왕은 진심으로 그녀를 사랑하기 시작해서 머지않아 그녀와 결혼하게 되었어요.
1년 쯤 지나고, 왕비가 아들을 낳았어요.
그 후 즉시, 왕비가 밤에 홀로 침대에 누워있을 때, 성모 마리아께서 오셔서 말씀하셨어요.
“만약 네가 진실을 말하고 금지된 방문을 열어봤다 내게 아뢴다면, 너의 입을 열어주고 목소리도 돌아오게 할 것이데, 하지만 네 잘못을 인정치 않고 완강히 거짓을 말한다면, 내 네 아이를 데리고 갈 것이다.” 
그런 다음 왕비에게 대답할 수 있게 했어요.
하지만 왕비는 여전히 완강했어요.
왕비가 말했어요.
“아뇨, 전 그 금지된 방문을 열지 않았어요.”
그래서 동정녀 마리아(성모 마리아)가 아기를 왕비의 품에서 거두어 사라졌어요.
다음 날 아기가 없어진 게 발견되자, 사람들 사이에 “왕비가 식인종이다. 그녀가 자기 아기를 죽인 거야.”라는 수군거림이 가득했어요.
왕비도 이 얘기를 들었지만 그 반대를 증명하는 얘기를 한 마디도 할 수 없었어요.
하지만 왕은 그 얘기를 믿지 않았죠. 왜냐하면 여전히 왕비를 너무도 많이 사랑했기 때문이에요. 
1년이 지나 왕비는 다시 아들을 낳았어요.
그날 밤 동정녀 마리아(성모 마리아)가 다시 그녀에게 와 말했어요.
“네가 금지된 방문을 열어다 고백한다면, 내 네 아이를 돌려주고 네 혀도 풀어주리라. 하지만 여전히 죄에 현혹되어 그 사실을 부정한다면, 내 이번에도 네 아기를 데리고 가리라.”
왕비가 또 다시 말했어요.
“아뇨, 전 그 금지된 방문을 열지 않았어요.”
그래서 동정녀 마리아께서 왕비의 품에서 아기를 거두어 하늘나라로 가버리셨어요.
다음날 아침, 아기가 또 사라진 게 발견되자, 백성들은 “왕비가 먹어치운 게 분명하다.”고 아우성을 쳤고, 이번엔 신하들까지 “왕비를 재판에 회부해야 합니다.”라고 요구했어요.
하지만 왕은 왕비를 정말 사랑했기 때문에 그걸 믿지 않았고 “이 일을 다시 언급하는 자가 있다면 사형으로 다스리겠노라.”라고 엄중히 경고하셨습니다. 
다음 해에 왕비가 예쁘고 귀여운 딸을 출산했어요.
그리고 그날 밤에 동정녀 마리아(성모 마리아)께서 세 번째로 오셔서 말했어요.
“나를 따르거라.”
동정녀 마리아는 왕비의 손을 잡고서 하늘나라로 이끄시어 거기서 살고 있는 왕비의 두 아이를 보여주었어요.
아이들이 왕비를 보고 웃었어요. 그리고 하늘나라의 공을 가지고 놀고 있었어요.
왕비는 목이 메게 기뻤어요.
그래서 동정녀 마리아께서 말씀하시길,
“네 마음이 누그러졌느냐? 만약 네가 금지된 방문을 열었다 고백하면 내 너에게 두 아들을 돌려주리라.”
하지만 이 세 번째 질문에도 왕비는 답하길,
“아뇨, 전 그 금지된 방문을 열어보지 않았어요.”라고 하였다.
그러자 동정녀 마리아께서 왕비를 다시 지상으로 떨구시고는, 왕비의 세 번째 아이(딸)도 마찬가지로 데리고 가버리셨다. 
다음날 아침, 아기가 사라진 게 널리 알려지지, 모든 사람들이 외쳐대길,
“왕비가 식인종이 분명하다. 그녀를 재판에 회부해야 한다.”라 하였다. 
그리고 왕도 더는 신하들을 제지하지 못하였다. 
그 후 즉시 재판이 열렸다. 
하지만 왕비는 아무 말도 할 수 없기에 자신을 방어할 수가 없었고, 급기야 왕비에겐 화형이 선고되었다. 
나무가 차곡차곡 놓이고, 왕비가 마지못해 끌려나와 묶이자, 불이 활활 그녀 주변에서 타오르기 시작했다. 
그토록 단단하던 자존심도 얼음처럼 녹고, 마음이 뉘우침으로 감동하자, 왕비가 생각했다. 
‘죽기 전에 내가 그 문을 열었다 고백할 수만 있다면.’
그러자 목소리가 되살아났고, 그녀가 소리 높여 외쳤다.
“에, 마리아님, 제가 한 거 맞아요.”
그러자 장대비가 하늘에서 내리어 화형식의 불을 끗다. 
한줄기 빛이 왕비를 비추는 가운데, 동정녀 마리아(성모 마리아)께서 양 옆에 두 아들(왕비의 아들)을 데리고 그리고 팔에 딸(왕비의 딸)을 안고서 내려오셨다. 
마리아께서 자상하게 왕비에게 말했다. 
“자기 죄를 회개하고 인정하는 자 용서받으리라.”
그런 다음 마리아께서 왕비에게 세 아이를 건네주시고, 왕비의 혀도 풀어주시고, 왕비의 남은 생 동안 행복을 보장해주셨다.  

(끝)

동화 「성모 마리아의 아이」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「성모 마리아의 아이」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter3.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥




4. 무서움을 배우러 나선 젊은이 이야기



두 아들을 둔 아버지가 계셨어요.
형은 스마트하고 현명해 모든 걸 해냈지만, 어찌된 일인지 아우는 영 어리석어 어떤 것도 배우지 못하거니와 이해도 전혀 못했어요.
그래서 아우를 볼 때면 사람들이 하는 말이 이랬어요.
“자기 아버지 골치만 섞이는 꼴통 저기 가네!”였어요.
그리고 무얼 해야 할 일이 생길 때도 형에게만 일이 돌아갔고, 오후건 밤이건 낙이건 교회 뒷마당 무덤을 지나가야 하건 제 아무리 먼 길을 가야 하건 간에 아버지도 또한 형에만 무얼 가져오라 시켰어요.
그럼 제아무리 잘난 형도 무서워선,
“아, 참, 저 안 가면 안 돼요, 아버지, 거긴 등골이 오싹 하단 말예요!”라고 말했어요.
또 한 번은 밤에 모닥불을 피워놓고 오싹한 얘기들 듣던 청중들이 이따금씩,
“왓따, 정말 등골이 오싹하네!”라고 했어요.
모퉁이에 앉아 있던 아우도 다른 사람들과 함께 있다 그 소리를 듣었는데요, 도무지 그게 무슨 의미로 한 말인지 감이 안 잡히는 거예요.
‘왜 사람들은 ‘등골이 오싹하다, 등골이 오싹해!’라고 말들 하는 게지. 뭔 소리람.‘라고 아우는 생각했어요. ‘아마도 내가 이해 못하고 있는 기술일 게 틀림없어.’
그러던 하루는 아버지께서 그에게 말했어요.
“들어봐라, 코찌질이던 네 친구들도 이제 다 커고 강해져다. 그러니 너도 먹고 살 뭔가를 배워야 한다. 네 형이 일하는 것 좀 봐라, 하지만 넌 밥벌이도 못하고 있잖니.”
“그건 그런데요, 아부지,”라며 그가 말했어요. “저도 엄청 배우고 싶은 게 하나 있긴 해요… 그 뭐더라 그래, 등골이 오싹한 걸 배워보고 싶어요. 저로선 이해도 못하겠거든요.”
그 말을 듣고 형이 웃으며 속으로 생각했다. 
“아이고 맙소사, 저런 멍텅구리가 다 있담! 생전 제 손으로 입에 풀칠해보긴 다 틀렸네. 남 밑에 가서 일하기도 다 틀렸고. 낫 놓고 기억자도 모른다는 게 지금 저 녀석이잖아.”
아버지가 한숨을 내쉬더니 말했어요.
“등골이 오싹한 걸 배워선 내 밥벌이도 제대로 못할 게다.”
이 일이 있고 얼마 지나지 않아서 ‘교회의 관리인’이 집을 방문했는데, 아버지가 자신의 골칫덩이 얘기를 꺼내며 통곡을 했어요. 그리고 둘째 아들은 다방면에서 또래들에 비해 뒤떨어져도 너무도 뒤떨어져 있어서 평생가도 아무거도 배우지 못할 거라 말했죠.
“아이고 내 팔자야,”라며 아버지가 말했어요. “앞으로 뭐 먹고 살 거냐고 물었더니 그 놈 하는 말이 ‘등골이 오싹한 걸’ 배워서 살 거라더군요.”
“그렇담,”라며 ‘교회의 관리인’이 말했어요. “제가 그 애를 데려다 배우게 할 수 있겠는데요. 그 애를 제게 보내주세요, 제가 사람 구실하게 만들어드리죠.” 
아버지는 기뻐했어요. 왜냐하면 교회 관리인 밑에 있다 보면 ‘뭐라도 배울 거’니까요.
그리하여 ‘교회의 관리인’은 청년을 데려가 종을 울리는 일을 맡겼어요.
하루 이틀 지난 밤 12시 무렵에 ‘교회의 관리인’이 청년을 깨우며 교회 탑 위로 올라가서 종을 울리라고 지시했어요.
‘넌 오늘 등골이 오싹한 게 뭔지 배우게 될 테다.’라고 ‘교회의 관리인’은 생각했어요.
그리곤 청년보다 먼저 교회 탑 위로 올라갔어요.
청년이 탑 꼭대기로 올라가 몸을 돌려 종의 끈을 잡으려는데 별안간 반대쪽 울림 구멍에 이는 계단에 허연 것이 서 있는 게 보이지 뭐예요.
“거기 누구요?”라고 청년이 외쳤어요. “물러가요, 밤에 여기 오심 안 돼요.”
하지만 ‘교회의 관리인’은 청년이 자신을 유령으로 생각할 수 있도록 하려고 그 자리에서 꿈쩍도 안하고 있었어요.
청년이 두 번째로 소리쳤어요. 
“얼씨구 뭐 어쩌자고?… 대답 또 안함, 내가 당신을 계단 아래로 던져버릴 줄 아쇼!”
‘교회의 관리인’은 생각했어요.
‘설마 말만 저리 하는 걸 게지.’
‘교회의 관리인’은 숨소리도 내지 않고서 돌처럼 서 있기만 했어요.
그러자 청년이 세 번째로 그에게 소리쳤고 이 세 번째 고함에도 상대방이 꿈쩍도 안 하자, 청년은 그에게 잽싸게 달려들어 이 유령을 계단 아래로 냅다 던져버렸어요.
그래서 자칭 유령은 10계단 아래로 떨어져 구석 모퉁이에 누워 있었어요.
그 후 즉시 청년이 종을 울렸고 종을 다 울린 다음 청년은 집(교회 관리인의 집)으로 돌아가 한 마디 일언반구도 없이 침대로 가 쿨쿨 잠이 들었어요.
‘교회 관리인’의 아내는 오랫동안 남편이 오기만 기다렸지만 남편은 끝내 오지 않았다. 
결국 아내는 걱정이 돼서 청년(주인공)을 깨우며 부탁했다. 
“내 남편 못 봤니? 너보다 앞서 탑으로 올라갔는데.”
“아뇨, 못 봤는데요.”라고 청년이 답했다. “하지만 반대편 계단에 누군가 서 있긴 했어요. 가지도 않고 대답도 않기에 제가 그를 깡패로 생각하고 계단 아래로 내던졌어요, 거기 가서 그게 아저씨인지 아닌지 볼 게요. 만약 아저씨라면 이거 미안한데.”
아내가 달려가 다리가 부러진 채 구석 모퉁이에 누워 있는 남편을 발견했다. 
아내는 남편(교회의 관리인)을 부축해 내려온 후, 다짜고짜 청년(주인공)의 아버지를 찾아가 삿대질을 해대어다. 
“당신 아들 때문에,”라며 아내가 말했다. “우리 남편이 죽을 뻔 했어! 그 놈이 내 남편을 계단 아래로 집어 던져 남편의 다리가 부서졌어. 당장 그 망할 놈팡이를 우리 집에서 데리고 가.”
청년의 아버지는 흠칫 놀라 그리로 달려가 아들을 꾸짖었다. 
“도대체 뭔 생각이냐?”라며 아버지가 물었어요. “네 머릿속에 악○가 든 게냐.”
“아부지,”라며 청년이 말했어요. “제 말 좀 들어봐요. 전 무죄에요. 그 아저씨가 유령인양 하고서 야밤에 거기 서 있었단 말예요. 전 그 인줄도 몰라고요, 혹시 싶어 세 번이나 소리지르며 제발 꺼져 달라 빌었는걸요.”
“아이고 내가 미쳐,”라며 아버지가 말했어요. “이 백해무익한 자슥아. 당장 내 눈 앞에서 꺼져라. 우리 부자의 인을 끊자.”
“예, 아부지, 기꺼이 그러죠, 두고 보세요. 등골이 오싹한 것만 배우고 나면 저도 먹고 살 수 있다고요.”
“아이고 내 팔자야,”라며 아버지가 말했어요. “그건 내가 할 소리다. 자 여기 네 몫 100백 원(원문→독일은화 50개)이다. 이거 가지고 어디 한 번 잘 살아봐라, 덤으로 세상에 나가거든, 네가 어디서 왔는지 그리고 네 아버지가 누군지 절대 말하지 말거라. 나도 더는 너 때문에 창피당하고 싶지 않다.”
“네, 아부지, 아부지 뜻대로 해드리죠. 아부지가 그리도 바라시는데 내 꼭 명심해 드리리다.” 
그리하여, 새벽의 여명이 밝아지자, 청년은 호주머니에 100만원(독일은화 50개)을 챙기고서 큰 길을 통해 위대한 여행을 시작했다. 
청년이 계속해서 속으로 속삭였다. 
‘흥 두고 보라지, 내 기필코 등골이 오싹한 걸 배울 테니! 그것만 배우고 고생 끝 행복 시작이라고!’
그때 한 남성이 다가오다 청년의 중얼거림을 듣게 되었고 뭐 어쨌든 청년과 동행을 하게 되었다. 
잠시 그렇게 길을 걷자 저쪽 방향에서 교수대들이 쭉 늘어서 있는 게 보였다. 
그 남성이 청년에게 말했다. 
“보게, 새끼줄에 목이 매달린 7명의 사람들이 저 나무에 치렁치렁 달려서 바람이 부는 대로 흔들리고 있는 게 보이지. 저 아래 앉아서 밤이 될 때까지 앉아 있어봐. 그럼 등골이 오싹한 걸 배우게 될 테니.”
“만약 그렇게만 된다면야,”라며 청년(주인공)이 말했어요. “이거 일이 쉬워 지는데. 하지만 등골이 오싹한 걸 내가 배우게 되면 내 당신에게 100만 원(독일은화 50개)을 주리다. 그럼 내일 아침에 보십시다.”
그리하여 청년은 교수대가 있는 곳으로 가 그 아래에 자리를 잡고 앉아서 저녁이 올 때까지 기다렸어요.
날이 추워 청년이 불을 피웠지만 밤 12시 쯤 되자 부는 바람에 불 기운이고 뭐고도 안 느껴질 정도였어요. 청년은 전혀 따뜻하지 않았답니다.
게다가 바람이 목이 매달려 있는 사람들을 서로 딱딱 부딪치는 바람에 매달린 사람들이 앞뒤로 자꾸 움직였어요.
청년이 속으로 생각했어요.
‘저 위에서 저리 춥게 고생을 하느니 차라리 불기운이 약해도 아래가 낮지.’
청년은 그들(사형수들)에게 연민을 느꼈어요. 그래서 사다리를 타고 올라가 그들을 한 사람씩 풀어서 7명 모두를 아래로 내려놓았어요.
그런 다음 불길을 작대기로 휘저어 불을 살린 다음, 불 주위로 둥글게 사형수들을 배치했어요.
사형수들이 거기 쭈그리고 앉아 가만히만 있다 보니, 불이 사형수들의 옷에 옮겨 붙였어요.
그래서 청년(주인공)이 말했어요.
“조심들 해, 그렇지 않음 다시 매단다.”
하지만 이미 죽은 사람들은 말이 없는 법, 옮겨 붙은 불이 더 타올랐어요.
그 바람에 화가 난 청년이 말했어요.
“내가 조심하랬지, 이제 나도 너희들을 어쩔 수가 없다. 내 탓 하지 마라.”
그러면서 청년은 차례대로 사형수들을 한 명씩 도로 매달았어요.
그런 다음 청년(주인공)은 불 옆에 쭈그리고 앉아 잠이 들었다. 
다음날 아침 그 남성이 청년 있는 데로 와 약속대로 100만 원(독일은화 50개)을 달라고 하며 말했다. 
“자, 이제 등골이 오싹한 게 뭔지 아셨겠지?”
“아닌데,”라며 청년이 답했다. “내가 어찌 그걸 알겠소? 저기 위에 있는 친구들(사형수들)이 입도 열지 않는데, 자기들 넝마 옷(헌 옷)에 불이 붙어 살점이 타 들어가도 모르는 바보들이던데 뭘.”
그래서 그 남성은 이 청년에게 돈 100만 원 받기는 다 그렀다고 여기곤 이 말을 남기곤 가버렸다. 
“내 살다 살다 이런 인간은 처음 보네.” 
마찬가지로 청년(주인공)도 자기 길을 가며 한 번 더 중얼거리기 시작했다. 
“아, 등골이 오싹한 걸 배워야 하는데! 아, 배워야 하는데!”
때마침 청년 뒤에서 성큼성큼 오고 있던 마부가 그 소리를 듣고 말하길,
“당신 누구요?”
“나도 몰라요,”라고 청년이 대답했다. 
그러자 마부가 물기를,
“그럼 어디서 왔소?”
“몰라요.”
“그럼 당신 아버지 성함이 어찌되오?”
“그건 말해 드릴 수 없소.”
“아까 전부터 이빨 사이로 중얼거리던데.”
“아,”라며 청년이 대꾸했다. “등골이 오싹한 걸 배우고 싶어서 말이오. 하지만 누구도 그걸 가르쳐주지 않는 군요.”
“내 원 참 그런 말 같지도 않은,”이라며 그 마부가 말했어요. “따라와 보슈, 내 기가 막힌 곳을 알려주리다.”
청년은 마부를 따라 갔어요.
저녁 무렵에 그들은 묵을 만한 주막에 도착했어요.
입구에서 청년이 또다시 아주 큼직한 소리로 말했어요.
“등골이 오싹한 걸 배워야 하는 건데! 등골 오싹을 배워야 하는데!”
이 소리를 들은 주막 주인이 웃으며 말했어요.
“당신이 찾는 게 그거라며, 여기 좋은 기회가 될 만한 게 있지요.”
그러자 주막 주인의 아내가 말했어요. 
“아, 조용히 좀 해. 그 많은 사람들이 호기심 캐기 좋아하다 다 죽었는데 이렇게 초롱초롱한 눈망울을 한 젊은이가 자칫하다 두 번 다시 햇볕을 못 보게 되면 어쩌려고 그 소리야, 당신 창피한 줄 좀 알아.”
하지만 청년은 반기며 말했다. 
“어려워도, 등골 오싹함을 배울 수만 있다면야 정말 여기까지 온 보람이 있겠는 걸요.”
그래서 청년은 주막 주인을 붙잡곤 나머지 얘기도 마저 들었다. 
얘기인즉슨, 여기서 그리 멀지 않은 곳에 유령이 나오는 성이 하나 있는데 등골이 오싹한 게 뭔지 배우기엔 이곳만한 곳이 없다는 것이었다.
게다가 그 성을 3일 밤만 봐 주기만 하면, 왕이 자기 딸을 아내로 주겠노라고 선포했다는 것이었다. 왕의 딸로 말할 거 같으면 태양도 울고 갈만큼 절세미녀라는 것이었다. 
또한 성안에는 막대한 양의 보물들이 저장되어 있다는 것이다. 
문제는 그걸 나쁜 유령들이 지키고 있는데, 보물의 양으로 말할 거 같으면 거지를 부자로 만들고 나서도 훨씬 남는 양이라는 것.
그래서 벌써 많은 젊은이들이 성으로 들어갔지만 그 중 단 한 명도 그 다음날 두 발로 걸어 나온 적이 없다고 했다. 
그리하여 청년(주인공)은 다음날 날이 밝는 대로 왕에게 가 “저도 해 볼래요. 유령이 출몰한다는 성에서 3일 밤 동안 망을 서 볼게요.”라고 말했다. 
왕이 이 청년의 몰골을 찬찬히 들여다보더니 마음에 들어 하며 말했다. 
“성에 들어가기 전에 원하는 물건이 있음 세 가지만 말하거라. 다만 물건들은 생명이 없는 것이여야 한다.”
그래서 청년(주인공)이 답하기를,
“불이랑, 갈이틀(갈이틀에, 나무를 끼워 돌릴 때, 칼을 이용해 돌아가는 나무를 깍거나 가는 옛날 기계. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/r88zRq )이랑, 식칼과 함께 도마(도마 또는 재단대. 부엌에서 음식 자를 때 사용하는 도마)를 하나 주세요.”
라고 했다. 
청년이 바란 그 물건들을 왕이 낮에 성으로 들여보내주었다. 
밤이 가까워지자 추워진 청년이 일어나 방 하나에 불을 피워 몸을 데우곤, 옆에 도마와 식칼을 놓고, ‘회전 선반’(받침대. 갈이틀)에 엉덩이를 붙이고 앉았다.  
“아, 등골이 오싹하다 더니!”라며 청년이 말했다. “여기서도 그걸 배우긴 다 글렀군.”
밤 12시 무렵에 청년이 불길 살리려 후후 불면서 작대기로 불길을 휘저으려던 찰나에, 저쪽 한 구석에서 뭔가가 갑자기 울기 시작했다. 
“야옹, 야옹! 춥다옹!”
“얼간이냐!”라며 청년이 큰소리로 말했다. “뭐라며 우는 거야 저거? 추워? 그럼 이리 와 불 좀 쬐며 몸을 녹여봐.” 
그리 말하자, 검고 큼지막한 거대 고양이 두 마리가 껑충 뛰어 청년 옆에 나란히 앉으며 당장에라도 잡을 먹을 듯한 부리부리한 눈매로 청년을 쬐려봤다.
잠깐 사이에 몸이 따듯해진 두 고양이가 말했다. 
“친구(=청년), 우리 카드놀이 한 번 할래?”
“안 될 건 없지?”라며 청년이 대답했어요. “하지만 너희들 손 좀 보여줘 봐.”
그래서 두 고양이가 자신의 앞발을 내밀자.
“오,”라며 청년이 말했어요. “무슨 손톱 발톱이 이렇게 길어! 기다려봐, 내 너희들을 위해 냉큼 잘라줄 테니.” 
그런 까닭에 청년은 두 고양이의 목덜미를 팔로 감싸곤 ‘회전 선반’(갈이틀의 회전선반. 갈이틀에, 나무를 끼워 돌릴 때, 칼을 이용해 돌아가는 나무를 깍거나 가는 옛날 기계. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/r88zRq )에 올려 빠르게 갈아 버렸다. 
“너희들의 손톱 발톱을 보니,”라며 청년이 말했어요. “카드 놀이할 기분이 싹 사라져버렸어.” 
그러더니 청년은 두 고양이를 죽도록 ?리고는 호수에 던져 버렸다. 
하지만 청년이 이 거대 고양이 두 마리를 떨구버리고 다시 불가에 앉자마자, 방에 있는 모든 구멍과 모서리로부터 검은 고양이들과 검은 개들이 불이 붙은 쇠사슬들을 하고서 모여들어, 급기야는 그 수가 너무 많아 청년이 불을 작대기로 쑤실 수도 없게 되었다. 
고양이와 개들은 엄청 으르렁 거리며 불길로 모여들더니 불을 갈기갈기 꺼버리려 시도하고 있었다. 
잠시 말없이 이 꼴을 보고 있던 청년은, 불이 정말 꺼지려하자, 식칼을 집어 들곤 소리쳤다.
“썩 꺼져 이 망나니들아,”라고 말한 다음 싹둑싹둑 그들을 베기 시작했어요.
그들 중 일부는 달아나고, 일부는 청년의 손에 죽어 이번에도 연못에 내던져졌어요.
그런 다음 청년은 도로 자리로 돌아와 타다 남은 불씨를 부채질해 살리곤 몸을 녹였어요.
이런 식으로 뜬 눈으로 밤을 지새다보니 눈꺼풀이 무거워져 잠이 물밀 듯 밀여왔어요.
그래서 청년이 주변을 둘러보니 모퉁이에 큰 침대가 하나 보였어요.
“적당하군,”라며 청년은 말한 다음 침대로 들어가 누웠어요.
청년이 막 눈을 붙이려는데, 얼씨구, 침대가 지 혼자서 움직이기 시작하는 거예요, 그러디니 침대가 온 성을 돌아다니지 뭐예요.
“얼씨구,”라며 청년이 말했어요. “더 빨리 가보지 그래.”
그러자 침대는 마치 6마리의 말들이 끄는 마차마냥 위 아래로 구르더니 문지방(=문)들과 계단들을 넘어 갑자기 폴짝 폴짝 뛰는가 싶더니 위 아래로 한 바퀴 구르더니 뒤집어져서 마치 산처럼 청년을 깔고 뭉갰어요.
하지만 청년은 침대이불과 베개들을 공중으로 던지고 빠져나와 말했어요.  
“좋아할 만한 자들은 탈 만하겠군.”
그러더니 청년은 불가 옆에 누워서 날이 새도록 쿨쿨 잤어요.
아침이 되자 왕이 왔다가 청년이 땅바닥 위에 누워 있는 모습을 보곤 ‘이 청년도 나쁜 유령들에게 죽임을 당해 죽은 거로군.’라고만 생각했다. 
왕이 말했다. 
“참 아쉽군… 잘 생긴 청년이었는데.”
청년이 그 말을 듣곤 벌떡 일어나며 말했다. 
“죽을 라면 멀었으니 걱정 마십쇼.”
왕은 기겁을 했다가 그래도 무척 기뻐 “어젯밤 상연(=유령들의 장난)이 어땠나?”라고 물어보았다. 
“할만 했습니다.”라며 청년이 대답했다. “하룻밤이 지났군요. 이제 나머지 이틀 밤도 극복해낼 겁니다.”
그런 다음 청년(=주인공)은 주막 주인에게로 갔다. 
주막 주인은 장사하다 말고 청년을 보자 눈이 휘둥그레져선 말했다. 
“자네를 다시 보게 될 줄은 몰랐네! 그래 등골 오싹은 배웠는가?”
“아뇨,”라고 청년이 대답했다. “사람들이 말한 게 다 헛수고지 뭐예요.” 
둘째 날 밤에 청년은 성으로 가 불가에 앉아 다시 한 번 자신의 18번(=등골 오싹!)을 부르기 시작하고 있었다.  
“등골이 오싹한 걸 배우고 싶다.”
밤 12시가 되자, 귀를 전율케 하는 소음 소리가 들려왔다. 
처음엔 살짝만 들리더니 이내 곧 소리는 커지고 또 커졌다. 
그러다 한 동안 잠잠해지더니 결국 엄청난 비명소리와 함께 하체만 있는 사람이 굴뚝에서 내려오더니 청년 앞에서 넘어졌다.
“얼씨구!”라며 청년이 큰소리로 말했다. “상체는 어데 두고 왔데. 이건 또 무슨 꼴값이지!” 
그러자 다시 우당탕하는 소리가 들리더니 비명소리 같은 울부짖음이 한 차례 있더니 이번엔 상체가 와 꺼꾸러져다. 
“있어봐!”라며 청년이 말했다. “너희들을 위해 불 좀 살려볼 테니.” 
청년이 불을 살리고 돌아보니, 두 몸뚱이는 그새 하나로 합쳐져선 무시무시한 사람 모습을 하곤 청년이 앉아 있었던 자리에 앉아 있었다. 
“야 임마, 거긴 내 자리야,”라며 청년이 말했다. “그 의자도 내 거고.”  
그러자 그 사람(유령)이 청년을 밀어젖히려 했고, 청년 또한 가만히 당하고 있을 사람이 아니어서 둘은 그렇게 옥신각신하다 결국 청년이 힘으로 그 사람(유령)을 밀쳐내고 다시 자신의 자리로 가 앉았다. 
그때 더 많은 사람들(유령들)이 하나 둘씩 굴러 나왔는데, 그들이 가지고 나온 걸 보니 사람의 시체 다리 9개와 두개골(=머리뼈) 2개였다. 
그렇게 사람들(유령들)은 사람의 시체 다리 9개를 세워놓곤 두개골을 굴려 ‘볼링’(원문→나인핀스. 옛날 볼링)을 하기 시작했다. 
청년도 그 놀이(=볼링)에 끼고 싶어 말했다. 
“어이, 나도 하면 안 돼?”
“좋아, 돈은 있겠지.”
“돈이야 남아돌지.”라며 청년이 말했어요. “하지만 너희들이 가지고 노는 공들(두개골 2개)은 완전히 둥글지가 못해.”
그러면서 청년은 그 두개골들을 가져다 ‘갈이틀의 선반’(갈이틀에, 나무를 끼워 돌릴 때, 칼을 이용해 돌아가는 나무를 깍거나 가는 옛날 기계. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/r88zRq )에 끼우고는 돌리면서 둥글게 갈기 시작했다. 
“자 다 됐어, 이제 잘 굴러갈 거야!”라고 청년이 말했다. 
(유령들의 대사→) “만세! 끝내주는데!”
청년은 그들(사람 시체 모습을 한 유령들)과 놀다 가지고 간 돈도 좀 잃고 말았어요.
그때 때마침 밤 12시를 알리는 종이 울리자 모든 게 흔적도 없이 사라지고 말았어요.
청년은 다시 누워 푹 잠이 들었어요.
다음 날 아침 왕이 와 청년에게 자초지종을 물었어요.
“이번엔 어떻게 살아났냐구요?”라며 청년이 되물었어요. “그냥 볼링 친 게 다였는데요.”
청년은 덧붙였어요. “젠장 볼링 치다 돈도 깨나 잃었는걸요.”
“그래 이번엔 등골이 오싹한 게 뭔지 알게 되었겠지?”
“네? 그게 뭔데요?”라며 청년이 말했어요. “밤새 놀기만 한 걸요. 등골 오싹을 꼭 배워야 하는데 이거 참!”
세 번째 밤에도 청년은 자신의 의자에 앉아 아주 슬퍼하며 말했어요.
“등골이 오싹한 걸 배워야 하는데.”
어둠이 짙어가자, 키가 큰 6명의 남성들(유령들)이 관(시체를 두는 관)을 들고 나타났어요.
그러자 청년(=주인공)이 말했어요. 
“하, 하, 저건 몇 년 전에 죽은 내 사촌동생이잖아.”
청년이 손짓을 하며 큰소리로 말했어요.
“어서와, 사촌동생아, 어서와.”
남성들(유령들)이 관을 땅에 두자, 청년이 다가가 뚜껑을 열어젖혔는데 관 안엔 시체가 한 구 누워 있었어요.
얼굴을 만져보니 얼음처럼 차가운 시신이었어요,.
“잠깐,”라며 청년이 말했어요. “너를 좀 데워줄게.”
그러더니 청년은 불가로 가 자신(=청년)의 손을 데우고는 후다닥 달려와 시신의 얼굴에 자신의 손을 얹었지만 여전히 차가운 건 어쩔 수 없었어요.
그래서 청년은 관 속의 시신을 꺼낸 다음, 불 옆에 앉아, 시신의 피가 다시 돌도록 시신의 두 팔을 막 문질러주었어요.
그럼에도 전혀 소용이 없자, 청년은 속으로 생각했어요.
“침대에 둘이 같이 누워 있음 따뜻해지려나.”
그래서 청년(=주인공)은 시신을 침대로 옮겨 눕힌 다음 자신도 그 옆에 누웠어요.
잠시 후 시신이 따뜻해지더니 움직이기 시작했어요.
그러자 청년이 말했어요.
“거봐, 사촌동생, 이제 좀 따뜻하지?”
하지만 시신은 일어나자 이렇게 소리쳤어요.
“배고프다. 너를 잡아먹을 테다.”
“뭐라고!”라며 청년이 말했다. “이 놈이 기껏 되살려줬더니 뭐가 어쩌고 어째? 당장 관에다 다시 넣어둘 테다.”
그래서 청년(주인공)은 시신을 들어다가 관 속에 다시 집어넣곤 뚜껑을 쾅하고 닫아버렸다. 
그러자 좀 전 그 6명의 남성들(유령들)이 와 관을 들고 가버렸다. 
“제기랄 이런 식으로 하다간,”라며 청년이 말했다. “평생 가도 등골이 오싹한 걸 배우긴 다 틀렸군.”
그러자 지금까지의 유령들보다 키가 더 커고 얼굴이 더 끔찍한 남성(유령)이 한 명 들어왔다. 
하지만 그는 나이가 많아 보였고 무엇보다 새하얗고 기다란 턱수염을 하고 있는 자였다. 
“고 녀석 참,”라며 노인(유령)이 큰소리로 말했다. “넌 이제 등골이 오싹해질 게다, 왜냐면 넌 곧 죽게 될 테니까.”
“놀고 있네,”라며 청년(주인공)이 말했다. “그런 소리는 내가 죽고 나서나 해야 하는 거 아냐.”
“네 놈을 뭉개주지.”라며 그 친구(노인 유령)가 말했다.
“어이, 어이, 그렇게 큰 소리 치지 말라고. 힘은 내가 당신보다 더 있을 테니 말이야.”
“어디 한 번 겨뤄볼까,”라며 그 노인(유령)이 말했다. “만약 네가 나보다 쌔면, 놓아주지… 어디, 겨뤄보자고.”
그런 다음 노인(유령)은 청년(주인공)을 데리고 껌껌한 통로들을 지나 대장간으로 데리고 갔다. 
노인(유령)이 도끼 한 자루를 집어 들더니 ‘모루’(=받침으로 사용하는 쇳덩이. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/vTy5cD )를 한 방에 내려쳐 땅에다 받아버렸다. 
“놀고 있네, 난 그보다 더 잘할 자신 있다고.”라며 청년이 말하더니 다른 ‘모루’(받침으로 사용하는 쇳덩이)로 갔다. 
노인은 청년 옆에서 직접 보고 싶었다. 
그러다 노인의 긴 턱수염이 모루 위에 놓이고 말았다. 
그때 청년이 도끼를 집어 들더니 한 방에 모루를 쪼갰는데, 그 바람에 노인의 턱수염이 쪼개진(찢어진) 모루에 끼고 말았다. 
“내가 도리어 당신을 잡았군,”라며 청년이 말했다. “자 누가 죽나 보자고.”
그런 다음 청년은 철봉(철로 된 막대기)을 부여잡더니 그걸로 노인(유령)을 노인이 신음 소리를 내며 “막대한 재물(=돈)을 줄 테니” 제발 그만하라고 애걸복걸 할 때까지 때렸다. 
그러자 청년은 철봉을 던져버리고 노인(유령)을 놓아주었다. 
노인(유령)은 청년을 데리고 다시 ‘성’으로 돌아와 성 지하실에 있던 세 상자의 궤짝들을 보여주었다. 거기엔 금은보화가 가득했다. 
“이 중,”라며 노인(유령)이 말했다. “이 중 하나는 가난한 사람들에게 나누어줄 것이며, 다른 하나는 왕깨 드릴 것이며, 세 번째 궤짝에 든 게 자네의 것이네.”
그러는 사이에 밤 12시를 알리는 종이 울리자, 유령(노인)이 흔적도 없이 사라져다. 
그리하여 청년은 다시 혼자 어둠 속에 남게 되었다. 
“다행히 출구를 찾을 순 있겠어,”라며 청년이 말했다. 어둠이 눈에 익자 곧 방으로 가는 출구를 찾아 청년은 다시 불 옆에 와서 잠이 들었다. 
다음날 아침 왕이 와 말했다. 
“그래 이젠 좀 등골이 오걸 배웠는감?”
“아뇨,”라고 청년(주인공)이 말했다. “그게 도대체 뭔데요? 제 죽은 사촌동생도 여기 왔다 갔고, 턱수염을 기른 노인네도 다녀갔지만 지하창고에 가득 든 금은보화만 보여주고 만 걸요. 아주도 제게 등골이 오싹한 게 뭔지 알려주지 않았어요.”
“자자,”라면 왕이 말했다. “성으로 가서 내 딸과 결혼식을 올리게.”
“성은이 망극하나이다.”라며 청년이 말했다. “하지만 등골이 오싹한 걸 어째 좀 배웠음 하는 마음만은 여전해요.”
그런 다음 노인(유령)이 준 금은보화가 운반되었고, 그리고 결혼식도 성대하게 잘 열렸다. 
하지만 젊은 왕(주인공)이 자신의 왕비를 무척 사랑했고 결혼생활도 행복 그 자체였지만, 젊은 왕은 여전히 시간만 나면 중얼거렸다. 
“등골이 오싹한 걸 배워야 하는데… 등골이 오싹한 걸 배워야 하는데.”
그래서 마침내 왕비도 짜증만땅이 되고 말았다. 
그녀의 시녀(몸종) 하나가 말했다. 
“제게 좋은 방법이 있어요. 등골이 오싹한 게 뭔지 왕께서도 곧 배우시게 되실 거예요.”
시녀(몸종. 왕비의 시녀)는 정원에 졸졸 흐르고 있는 개울가로 가 ‘모샘치’(잉어과에 속하는 작은 물고기. 낚싯밥으로 사용됨. 사진링크 ? https://goo.gl/vNQKwC )를 양동이에 한 가득 담아와 왕비께 건넸다. 
그날 밤 젊은 왕(주인공)이 잠을 자고 있는데, 왕비(아내)가 왕의 옷을 벗기곤 시녀에게 건네받았던 ‘양동이에 한 가득 든 모샘치(작은 물고기)와 물’을 왕에게 쏟아 부었다. 
그 바람에 작은 물고기들이 왕의 몸 위 여기저기에서 버둥버둥 거렸다.
그게(작은 물고기의 버둥거림) 그치자, 왕이 벌떡 일어나며 소리쳤다. 
“오, 뭐 때문에 등골이 이렇게 오싹한 거지?… 오, 사랑하는 여보(왕비), 나 지금 등골이 오싹해! 아! 나도 이제 등골이 오싹한 게 뭔지 알게 됐다고!”

(끝)

동화 「무서움을 배우러 나선 젊은이 이야기」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「무서움을 배우러 나선 젊은이 이야기」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter4.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



5. 늑대와 일곱 마리의 어린 염소들



옛날에 일곱 명의 아기 염소들을 키우는 엄마 염소 한 명이 살고 있었어요.
모든 엄마들처럼 그녀도 자신의 새끼들을 무척이나 사랑했더랍니다.
하루는 엄마 염소가 먹을 것을 구하러 숲으로 들어가게 되었어요.
그래서 엄마는 7명의 새끼 염소들을 모두 불러 모은 다음 말했어요.
“아가들아, 엄마가 숲에 가야 하니까, 너희들은 늑대를 조심하며 집을 지키고 있으렴. 만약 늑대가 집으로 들어오면 너희들을 모두 잡아먹을 테니까 말이다… 피부며, 머리카락이며, 모두 다 말이야. 늑대는 종종 변장을 하고 나타나니, 거친 목소리와 검은 발을 보고서 그게 늑대인 걸 알려무나.”
새끼 염소들이 합창했어요.
“네 엄마. 우리들 조심해서 집을 지킬게요. 걱정 말고 다녀오세요.”
그래서 엄마 염소는 “매애 매애” 울며 마음 편히 길을 나섰어요.
곧 누군가 현관문을 두드리며 외쳤다. 
“얘들아, 문 열거라, 엄마 왔다. 너희들 주려고 먹을 걸 가져왔다.”
하지만 목소리가 쉬었지 뭐에요. 그래서 아기 염소들은 대번에 그게 늑대란 것을 알아차렸어요.
“우린 문 안 열어줄 거예요,”라며 새끼 염소들이 큰 소리로 말했어요.“당신은 우리 엄마가 아니에요. 우리 엄마 목소리가 얼마나 부드럽고 상냥한데, 당신 목소리는 쉰 목소리에요. 아저씬 늑대죠!”
그래서 늑대는 자리를 떠 가게로 가서 분필가루를 한 움큼 사 집어삼켜 목소리를 부드럽게 만들었다. 
늑대는 다시 돌아와 집 현관문을 두드리며 소리쳤다. 
“얘들아, 문을 열거라, 너희들 줄 음식을 가지고 엄마가 돌아왔다.”
하지만 늑대는 자신의 검은 앞발들을 창문에 대고 있었어요. 
그래서 어린 염소들이 그걸 보고서 소리쳤어요.
“저희들은 문을 열어주지 않을 거예요. 우리 엄마 손은 당신 손처럼 새까맣지가 않단 말에요. 아저씨 늑대죠.”
그러자 늑대가 빵가게로 뛰어가 말했다. 
“내 앞발이 다쳤으니 빵 반죽 덩어리로 내 앞발을 문질러 발라죠.” 
그래서 빵 가게 주인은 빵 반죽 덩어리로 늑대의 앞발들을 문질러 발라주었어요.
늑대는 그런 다음 방앗간 주인에게로 가 말했어요.
“흰 밀가루들을 내 앞발들 위에 흩뿌려봐.”
하지만 방앗간 주인은 속으로 생각했어요.
“늑대가 또 누군가를 속이려고 하는구나.”
그래서 방앗간 주인은 늑대의 청을 거절했어요.
그러자 늑대가 대번에 말하길,
“내 말대로 안 함, 너부터 잡아먹고 말겠다.”
그래서 방앗간 주인이 겁을 집어 먹고서 늑대의 앞발들을 새하얗게 해주고 말았어요.
진실로 인간이란 이와 같아요. 
그리하여 이 비열한 작자(늑대)는 세 번째로 현관문 앞으로 와 두드리며 말했어요.
“얘들아, 문을 열거라, 너희의 사랑스런 엄마가 먹을 것을 들고 방금 막 숲에서 돌아왔단다.”
새끼 염소들이 소리쳤어요.
“저희 엄마인지 볼 수 있게 우선 당신의 발들을 보여주세요.”
그러자 늑대가 창문을 통해 앞발들을 내밀었다. 
새끼 염소들이 보니 분명 흰 앞발이었다. 
그래서 그를 엄마라고 믿고 문을 열어주었다.  
하지만 들어올 사람은 늑대 말고 누가 있더란 말인가!
아기 염소들은 겁이나 숨기 바빴다. 
첫째는 식탁 테이블 아래로 들어갔고, 둘째는 침대 속에 숨었고, 셋째는 난로 속에 숨었고, 넷째는 부엌에 숨었고, 다섯째는 찬장(컵이나 그릇을 두는 곳)에 숨었고, 여섯째는 세숫대야 아래에 숨었고, 마지막으로 일곱째는 벽시계 케이스(벽시계를 보관하는 상자) 속에 숨었다. 
하지만 늑대는 그들 모두를 찾아내선 다짜고짜 한 명씩 차례로 꿀꺽 꿀꺽 집어 삼켜버렸다.  
벽시계 케이스 속에 숨어있던 막내(일곱째)만은 유일하게 늑대에게 발견되지 않아 무사할 수 있었다. 
실컷 배를 채운 늑대는 푸른(초록색) 풀밭 나무 아래에 자리를 잡고 누워 코를 골기 시작했다. 
미지 않아 엄마 염소가 숲에서 집으로 다시 돌아와 보니, 아! 이 처참한 광경이란! 
현관문은 활짝 열리 채였고, 식탁 테이블이며, 의자들이며, 소파들이 죄다 찢어진 상태였고, 세숫대야는 산산조각 깨진 상태였고, 침대이불들이며 베개들은 죄다 침대 밖에 떨어져 있는 상태였다. 
엄마 염소는 아이들을 애타게 찾아보았지만 아이들은 그 어디에도 없었어요.
엄마 염소는 아이들의 이름을 하나하나 차례대로 불러보았지만, 어느 아이의 대답도 들을 수 없었어요.
마침 엄마 염소가 막내의 이름을 부르자, 떨리는 목소리 하나가 외쳤어요.
“엄마 나 여기 벽시계 케이스 안에 있어요.” 
엄마 염소가 아이를 꺼내주었어요.
막내 염소의 말로는, 늑대와 들어와 모든 새끼 염소들을 잡아먹었다는 거예요.
그 말에 엄마 여소가 자신의 불쌍한 아가야들을 생각하며 얼마나 눈물을 흘렸는지 여러분들은 상상이 가세요.(←원문에 있는 문장임. 제 마음대로 추가한 문장 아님.)
마침내 엄마 염소가 눈물을 그치고 밖으로 나갔어요. 막내도 엄마를 따라 같이 달렸어요.
그들이 풀밭에 다다르니, 나무 옆에 늑대가 누워선 나뭇가지들이 흔들릴 정도로 코를 골며 자고 있었어요.
엄마 염소가 늑대의 몸을 찬찬히 살펴보니 불룩해진 배속에서 뭔가가 움직이며 아등바등하고 있는 게 보였어요.
“오 하느님,”라며 엄마 염소가 말했어요. “늑대가 제 불쌍한 아가야들을 통째로 삼키는 바람에 얘들이 아직 살 수 있는 거군요.”
그런 다음 막내가 집으로 뛰어가 얼른 가위와 바늘과 실을 가져왔다. 
엄마 염소가 이 괴물(늑대)의 배를 가위로 한 번 가르자마자, 한 아이(염소)의 머리가 불쑥 튀어나왔다. 
엄마 염소가 좀 더 늑대 배를 가르자, 여섯 명의 아기 염소들이 모두 차례대로 튀어나왔다. 
이리하여 새끼 염소들은 큰 상처 없이 모두 다시 살아날 수 있었다. 
이는 모두 괴물(늑대)의 탐욕이 너무도 심했기 때문에 아기 염소들을 통째로 꿀꺽 꿀꺽 삼켰기 때문에 가능한 일이었다. 
엄마 염소와 새끼 염소들이 얼마나 기뻐하든지!
새끼 염소들은 사랑하는 엄마를 얼싸안고 결혼식장의 선원(배를 타는 선원들) 마냥 폴짝 폴짝 뛰었어요.  
하지만 엄마 염소는 말했어요.
“자, 가서 좀 큰 돌들을 주워오거라, 사악한 짐승(늑대)의 배를 그것으로 채울 거니까. 그가 자는 사이에 말이다.”
그래서 일곱 명의 새끼 염소들은 저쪽으로 초스피드로 달려가서 돌들을 질질 끌고 와 새끼 염소들의 숫자만큼의 돌들을 늑대의 배 속에 넣었답니다.
그런 다음 엄마 염소는 황급히 늑대의 배를 다시 꿰맸어요.
그래서 늑대는 아무것도 모르고 잠만 쿨쿨 잤어요.
마침내 늑대가 잠에서 깨서 두 다리로 일어났어요.
뱃속에 든 돌들 때문에 늑대는 목이 몹시 말랐어요.
그래서 물을 마시려고 우물가로 갔어요.
늑대가 어기적어기적 걷기 시작하자, 뱃속에 든 돌들이 막 서로 부딪히며 덜걱덜걱 소리를 냈어요.
그러자 늑대가 노래를 불렀죠.

“뭐가 이리 덜커덕덜커덕 데굴데굴 거리남,
아까 먹은 새끼 염소들의 뼈들인가?
여섯 마리의 새끼 염소들 같지만,
그건 그냥 큰 돌들이라네.”

우물가에 다다른 늑대가 허리를 굽혀 물을 막 마시려던 찰나에, 뱃속에 든 돌들의 무게중심이 우르르 앞으로 쏠리면서 미처 손 쓸 틈도 없이, 늑대는 그만 “으악!”하며 물에 빠져 죽고 말았어요.
일곱 명의 새끼 염소들이 그 광경을 지켜보다 우물가로 달려와 환호성을 지르며 소리쳤어요.
“만세! 늑대가 죽었다! 늑대가 죽었어!”
새끼 염소들은 너무 기뻐서 엄마 염소와 함께 우물가 주변을 둥글게 돌며 춤을 추었답니다.

(끝)

동화 「늑대와 일곱 마리의 어린 염소들」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「늑대와 일곱 마리의 어린 염소들」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter5.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥


6. 충신 요하네스



■ 미리알림
「충신 요하네스」의 내용은 충신(신하)이 목숨을 바쳐 왕을 구한다는 내용입니다. 혹시 이런 유의 글에 거부감이 있으시면 앞부분 조금 읽어보시고 안 읽으셔도 됩니다. 그림형제의 동화가 백 년 전 동화이다 보니 그때는 동화였겠지만 지금 보기엔 내용에 과한 부분이 있습니다. 
이번 동화는 건너뛰시고, 그림형제의 다른 동화 해석할 때 다시 읽으시면 됩니다. 종류(동화)가 많거든요. 그래도 다 읽어주시면 감사하겠죠 ㅋㅋ :)

(분문 시작)

충신 요하네스

옛날 옛날에 병에 걸리신 늙은 왕이 혼자 생각했어요.
‘병이 중해 죽을 때까지 누워만 있을 거 같군.’
그런 다음 왕이 말했어요.
“충신 요하네스를 들라 해라.”
충신 요하네스는 왕이 가장 총애하는 신하였어요.
평생에 걸쳐 한결 된 자세로 왕을 보필해왔었죠.
총신 요하네스가 침대 옆으로 다가오자, 왕이 말했어요.
“충실한 요하네스여, 짐은 아무래도 멀지 않은 거 같다. 다만 내 아들이 걱정이구나. 예민한 나이라 혼자 추스르지도 못할 걸 생각하니. 그러니 자네가 그의 양부(아버지)가 되어주고 알아야 할 것들을 모두 가르쳐주겠다, 내게 다짐해준다면 난 평안히 눈을 감을 수 있겠구나.” 
충신 요하네스가 대답했어요.
“제 목숨을 다해 왕지님을 저버리지 않고 충심으로 보필하겠습니다.”
이 대답에 늙은 왕이 말했어요.
“난 이제 두 눈을 감아도 여한이 없도다.”
그때 늙은 왕께서 덧붙이셨습니다.
“내가 죽은 다음 왕자에게 이 성을 모두 보여주게나. 모든 방이며, 홀이며, 금고와 그 안에 보관되어 있는 모든 보물들까지 다 보여주데, 긴 복도에 끝에 있는 마지막 방만은 보여주지 말게나. 거기엔 ‘황금 나라’의 공주 그림이 있으니 보여주지 말게나. 만약 왕자가 그 그림을 보게 되면 첫눈에 너무도 반해 졸도(=기절)한 나머지 쓰려져 스스로를 크나큰 위험 속에 빠뜨리고 말 것이기 때문이야. 그러니 자네가 뭔 일이 있더라도 왕자가 그 방을 못 보게 하게나.”
충신 요하네스가 다시 한 번 늙은 왕께 이와 관련된 다짐을 하자, 왕은 더는 여한이 없는 듯 베게에 고개를 누이곤 그대로 돌아가셨습니다.
늙은 왕을 무덤으로 옮겨드린 다음, 늙은 왕과 침대 맡에서 드렸던 다짐을 충신 요하네스는 젊은 왕에게도 해드린 후 말했습니다.
“전의 왕께 충심을 다했듯 왕께도 제 목숨을 다해서라도 충성할 것을 다짐 드립니다.”
애도 기간이 끝나자, 충신 요하네스가 젊은 왕께 말했어요.
“전하의 유산을 보실 시간입니다. 제가 전하께 아버님의 궁전을 보여드리겠사옵니다.”
그래서 요하네스(주인공)는 왕(젊은 왕)을 데리고 궁전을 위아래 할 것 없이 구석구석 모든 곳을 보여드리고 금은보화들이며 화려한 방들이며 다 보여드렸어요. 
다만 위험한 그림이 걸려 있는 방만은 열지 않았어요.
그 그림은 문을 열며 바로 보이는 곳에 걸려 있었는데, 어찌나 기가 막힐 정도로 잘 그렸던지 그림이 마치 살아 숨 쉬는 듯하여 세상에 이렇게 매력적이고 아름다울 수가 없었어요.
하지만 충신 요하네스가 매번 이 방문 앞을 그냥 지나치는 게 눈에 뻔하자 젊은 왕이 말했어요.
“그대는 왜 이 방을 열지 않지?”    
“거기엔 전하를,”라며 요하네스(주인공)가 말했어요. “위험에 빠뜨릴 수 있는 게 있습니다.”
하지만 왕은 말했어요.
“궁전은 다 봤다. 이 방 안에 뭐가 들었는지도 보겠다.”
그러더니 왕은 문으로 가 힘으로 문을 부수려고 했어요. 
그러자 충신 요하네스가 왕을 뒤에서 붙들며 말했어요.
“선왕(앞의 왕)께 이 방안에 있는 걸 전하께 보여주지 않겠다 제 목숨을 걸고 약속했습니다. 이러심 전하나 제게 큰 불행을 초래하게 됩니다.”
“아, 아니,”라며 젊은 왕이 대답했어요. “내가 이 방에 못 들어가도 파멸할 게 뻔하다. 내 두 눈으로 안을 보기 전까진 밤이고 낮이고 애 타할 거니. 자네가 이 방문을 열기 전까지 난 이 자리에서 한 발자국도 꿈쩍하지 않겠다.”
어쩔 수 없다고 판단한 충신 요하네스가 많은 한숨을 쉬며 무거운 마음으로 열쇠 뭉치에서 그 방문 열쇠를 찾았다.
요하네스는 문을 열고서 제일 먼저 들어갔다.
요하네스가 속으로 그 그림을 왕이 못 보게 감추려 했기 때문이다. 
하지만 그게 뭔 소용이겠는가?
왕이 까치발(발끝으로 선 자세)로 해서 요하네스의 어깨 너머로 그걸 보고 말았는데.
아가씨(공주)의 초상화를 본 왕은, 그 그림이 너무도 굉장하고 빛났던 나머지, 졸도해 바닥에 쓰러지고 말았다.   
충신 요하네스(주인공)는 왕을 들어 침대로 옮겨드리며 슬픈 생각을 했다. 
“불행이 우리를 덮쳤구나. 주여, 이 끝은 어디나이까?”
그런 다음 요하네스는 포도주로 왕의 기운을 북돋아드렸다. 다행히 왕이 의식을 다시 차리셨다. 
의식을 차린 왕의 첫마디가 이러했다. 
“아, 아름다운 초상화다! 누구지?”
“황금 나라 공주의 초상화입니다.”라고 충신 요하네스가 대답했다. 
그러자 왕이 계속 말을 이어갔다. 
“그녀를 향한 내 사랑이 너무도 커, 나무에 붙어 있는 모든 잎사귀들이 혀라 해도 내 마음을 다 표현하진 못하리라. 내 삶을 다해서라도 그녀를 얻으리라. 자네는 둘도 없는 내 충신이지 않는가, 나를 도와주게.”
어떻게 하면 이 문제를 풀 수 있을지 충신 요하네스(주인공)는 오랜 숙고(생각)에 들어갔어요. 
왜냐하면 이건(공주와의 결혼) 황금 나라의 공주를 보는 것보다 훨씬 더 어렵기 때문이죠.
마침내 요하네스가 한 가지 방법을 고안해냈어요.
그가 왕께 말했어요.
“공주의 관심사는 온통 황금으로 채워져 있다 들었사옵니다… 그래서 그녀의 테이블이며 의자며 접시며 잔(컵)이며 그릇이며 가구용품들이 죄다 금이라하옵니다. 전하께서 가지신 황금 5톤 중에서, 1톤을 우리나라의 금세공인(금을 가공하는 기술자)들에게 맡기시어 온갖 그릇과 부엌세간과 새와 날짐승과 이색적인 동물들의 형상 등등 공주가 좋아할 만한 것들로 만들게 하시고, 그 완성품들을 가지고 저와 함께 거리로 건너가 운을 한 번 시험해보십시다.” 
왕이 즉시 왕국 내의 모든 금세공인(금을 다루는 기술자)들을 들라하라 지시했어요.
그래서 그들이 도착해 밤낮으로 일한 결과 마침내 휘황찬란한 금 가공품들이 즐비하게 준비되었어요.
이것들을 배 한척에 모두 실은, 충신 요하네스(주인공)는 상인 복장으로 변신하고, 왕께도 눈에 띄지 않게 하시라며 상인 복장을 입게 했어요.
그렇게 하여 그들은 바다를 건너고 또 건너 황금 나라의 공주님이 살고 계신 도시에 다다를 수 있었답니다.
“전하께서는 배에 머무시어 저를 기다려주십시오.”라며 충신 요하네스(주인공)이 말했어요. “그래도 혹시 제가 공주님을 데리고 올 수 있으니 전하께서는 모든 금 그릇들을 가지런히 배에 진열해놓으시고 나머지 금 가공품들로 배를 꾸며놓아 주십시오.”
그런 다음 요하네스(주인공)는 온갖 종류의 금가공품들을 ‘무릎덮개 천’에 담고 해안가로 가 곧장 왕궁으로 나아갔다. 
궁궐 안뜰에 들어서고 보니, 한(한 명 할 때의 ‘한’) 아름다운 소녀가 우물가 옆에 앉아 두 손으로 금 양동이로 물을 ‘기르고’(떠 담고) 있었다.
찰랑이는 양동이물을 들고 막 돌아서려는데 낮선 사람이 보이자, 그 소녀가 “누구세요?”라고 물었어요.
그래서 요하네스(주인공)는 대답했어요.
“상인이옵니다.”
그런 다음 자신의 무릎덮개 천을 펼쳐 그 소녀가 볼 수 있게 했어요.
그러자 소녀는 “어머나, 정말 예쁜 금 장식품들이네요!”라며 외치더니 물 양동이를 한쪽 편에 내려놓고는 금 세공품들을 하나하나 찬찬히 들여다보기 시작했어요.
그런 다음 소녀가 말했어요.
“저희 공주님께 보여드리고 싶어요. 이런 금 장식품들을 엄청 좋아라 하시거든요. 아마 이것들 다 사자고 하실 거예요.”
 소녀는 요하네스의 손을 잡고서 2층으로 데려갔어요.
소녀가 실은 공주님의 시녀였던 거예요.
그 물건들을 보자 공주님은 무척 기분이 좋아서 말했어요.
“너무 예뻐요, 제가 이거 다 살게요.”
하지만 충신 요하네스(주인공)은 이렇게 말했어요.
“전(저는) 그저 부자 상인의 미천한 종에 지나지 않습니다. 제 주인님이 계신 선박에는 이것보다 더 끝내주는 금세공품들이 많습니다. 지금까지 금으로 만들어진 것들 중 가장 값지고 아름다운 물건들이죠.”
“그것들도 모두 가지고 와 주세요.”라고 공주님이 말했어요.
하지만 요하네스(주인공)은 말했어요.
“선박에 실려 있는 금세공품들이 너무도 많은 양이라 옮기려면 수일이 걸려고 모자랄 정도이며 그걸 다 전시하려면 아무리 방이 많고 커도 다 모자랄 지경이옵니다.”
그러자 호기심과 갈망(열망)에 들뜬 공주의 입에서 마침내 이런 말이 나왔어요.
“그럼 저를 그 배로 안내해주세요. 제가 거기로 가서 당신 주인이 가지고 계시다는 그 보물들을 보도록 할게요.”
충신 요하네스(주인공)는 무척 기뻐서 그 즉시 공주를 배로 안내했어요.
그림보다 실물이 훨씬 예쁜 공주를 본 왕(요하네스의 왕)의 심장은 고동치다 못해 두 동강으로 쪼개지고 만 느낌이었어요. 
공주가 배에 오르고, 왕이 공주를 선내(배안)로 안내했어요.
하지만 충신 요하네스는 그들을 따라 선내로 들어가지 않고 뒤로 물러나 키잡이에게로 가서 배를 즉시 띄울 것을 명령했어요.
“새처럼 나부낄 때까지 돛을 높이 올리거라.” 
하지만 선내(배안)에서는 왕이 공주에게 황금 그릇이며 날짐승과 낮선 동물들의 형상을 한 갖가지 금세공품들을 보여주고 있었어요.
금세공품들을 몇 시간에 걸쳐 들여다보느라 공주는 너무 좋아서 배가 육지 멀리 항해하고 있다는 사실도 몰랐어요.
마침내 모두 다 본 다음 공주는 상인(왕이 변장한 것)에게 감사인사를 하고 집으로 돌아가려고 배의 측면으로 가보니 육지는 까마득히 멀리 보이고 배는 돛들을 나부끼며 망망대해를 서둘러 가러지르고 있지 뭐예요.
“아,”라며 깜짝 놀란 공주가 비병을 질렀어요. “속았어! 한 눈 팔다 상인의 계략에 빠지고 말았어… 이럴 바에야 차라리 죽고 말겠어!” 
그렇지만 왕이 공주의 손을 붙잡으며 말했어요.
“저는 상인이 아닙니다. 당신보다 신분이 비천하지 않은 왕입니다. 제가 미처 헤아리지 못한 점이 있어 심려를 끼쳐드렸다면 그건 당신에 대한 제 사랑이 과했기 때문입니다. 난 당신의 초상화를 보자마자 한 눈에 반해 졸도하고 말았을 정도입니다.”
이 말을 듣자 황금 나라의 공주의 마음도 어느새 누그러지고 말았어요.
마음의 안정을 찾자 공주의 마음이 그(왕)에게로 기울었고 급기야 그의 아내가가 되는 것에 동의했어요.
배가 망망대해(바다)를 건너 앞으로 나아가고 있는 동안, 하루는 우연히도 배의 앞에서 음악을 연주하며 앉아 있던 충신 요하네스의 눈에 큰까마귀(갈가마귀. 불길한 새로 여겨짐) 세 마리가 날아와 배에 앉는 것이 보였어요. 
그래서 요하네스(주인공)가 음악연주를 멈추고 큰까마귀들이 서로 나누는 얘기를 들어봤어요. 왜냐하면 요하네스는 새가 말하는 것을 이해할 수 있었거든요.
첫 번째 큰까마귀가 말했어요.
“오, 왕이 황금나라 공주를 데리고 집으로 가나보네.”
“그렇다더군.”라며 두 번째 큰까마귀가 대답했어요. “하지만 아직 그녀를 설득하진 못했다던데.”
그러자 세 번째 큰까마귀가 말했어요. “못하긴 뭘 못해, 지금 저렇게 배안에서 공주가 왕 옆에 같이 앉아 있는데.”
그러자 첫 번째 큰까마귀(갈가마귀. 불길한 새로 여겨짐)가 재차 말하기 시작했어요.
“그럼 그게 왕에게 좋을까? 그들이 항구에 도착하면 밤색 말 한 마리가 왕을 마중 나올 거고 그럼 젊은 왕은 그걸 타고 싶어 할 걸, 하지만 만에 하나 왕이 그 말의 등에 올랐다가는 미친 듯 내달리는 말 때문에 공중으로 나가 떨어져 왕은 두 번 다시 마누라 얼굴을 못 보게 될 건데. 그럼 그게 왕에게 좋은 거냐고?”
두 번째 큰까마귀가 말했어요. “그럼 벗어날 수 있는 방안이 있는 거야?”
“오, 당연히, 누군가가 대신 재빨리 그 말에 탄 다음, 말의 ‘권총용 가죽 케이스’에 있는 권총으로 말을 쏘아 죽이면, 젊은 왕의 목숨을 구할 수 있어. 하지만 누가 그러겠어? 게다가 이 사실을 왕에게 말하는 사람은 누구든 발가락에서부터 무릎 관절까지 돌로 변하고 말 텐데.”
그러자 두 번째 ‘큰까마귀’(갈가마귀. 불길한 새로 여겨짐)가 말했어요.
“그런 거람녀 나도 하나 알고 있어. 그 밤색 말이 죽더라도, 젊은 왕은 신부를 품지 못하게 되어 있어. 일행이 성에 도착하면, 큰 접시 위에 금과 은으로 짠 거 같이 보이는 정교한 결혼식 의상이 놓여 있을 텐데, 하지만 그 의상은 황과 ‘피치’(석탄에서 얻는 끈적한 물질. 방수재료)야, 만약 그걸 모르고 젊은 왕이 그 옷을 걸쳤다가는 몸이 그 즉시 뼈와 골수까지 타 다 타버리고 말거야.”
세 번째 큰까마귀가 말했다. 
“빠져나올 방도가 전혀 없는 거야?”
“응, 그래,”라며 두 번째 ‘큰까마귀’(갈가마귀. 불길한 새로 여겨짐)가 말했어요.
“만약 장갑을 낀 누군가가 그 의상을 쥐어 불에 던져 태운다면, 젊은 왕을 구할 순 있어. 하지만 누가 그러겠어? 게다가 만에 하나 이 사실을 왕에게 고자질하는 자가 있음 그 자의 몸이 무릎 관절에서부터 심장까지 돌로 변하고 말 텐데.”
그러자 세 번째 '큰까마귀'(갈가마귀. 불길한 새로 여겨짐)가 말했어요.
“그런 거라면 나도 하나 알고 있어. 만약 그 결혼식 의상이 불태워진다 해도, 젊은 왕은 신부를 품지 못하게 되어 있어. 결혼식 후 무도회가 시작되고 새 왕비가 춤을 추게 되며, 새 왕비는 갑자기 창백해져 죽은 듯 쓰러지고 말 거야, 이때 만약 누군가가 그녀의 옷을 들추고 오른쪽 가슴을 빨아 피 세 방울을 뱉어내지 않음 새 왕비는 죽고 말 거야. 하지만 누가 그럴 수 있겠어, 게다가 이 얘기를 발설하는 자는 영혼의 머리 꼭대기에서부터 발끝까지 모두 돌로 변하고 말 텐데.”
'큰까마귀'(갈가마귀. 불길한 새로 여겨짐)들은 이와 같은 말을 주고받고 나더니 앞쪽으로 날아가고 말았다. 
그렇지만 충신 요하네스는 이들의 대화를 모두 이해했던 것이다.
하지만 이때부터 요하네스의 마음은 무척 무거워져 슬퍼졌다. 
왜냐하면 자신이 들은 것을 감추자니 왕이 불행해질 것이고, 그렇다고 왕께 이 사실을 알리자니 요하네스 자신의 몸이 남아나지 않을 것이기 때문이다. 
하지만 결국에는 요하네스도 속으로 말했다. 
“그래도 주군을 구해야한다. 비록 그것이 내 스스로를 파멸에 이르게 할지라도.”
그리하여 그들이 해안가에 다다랐을 때, '큰까마귀'(갈가마귀. 불길한 새로 여겨짐)들이 예언했던 일들이 일어나고 말았던 것이다.
매우 훌륭해 보이는 밤색 말이 앞으로 튀어나오자, “좋은데,”라며 왕이 말했다. “저 말을 타고 궁궐까지 가련다.”
왕이 막 말을 잡아타려는데, 충신 요하네스가 한 발 앞서 나아가더니 재빨리 말 등에 타더니 말의 ‘권총용 가죽 케이스’에서 권총을 꺼내 말을 쏘았다. 
그러자 왕의 수행원들이 충신 요하네스에 대해 좋은 마음을 품지 못하게 되어 말했다. 
“전하께서 타고 가시려던 저 아름다운 동물을 쏴 죽이다니 저렇게 무례할 수가.”
하지만 왕은 말하기를,
“잠자코들 있거라 그리고 그(충신 요하네스)를 내버려두거라. 그는 내 둘도 없는 충성스런 신하 요하네스다. 괜히 그러진 않았을 게다!” 
그들이 궁전에 도착하자, 홀에 큰 접시가 하나 놓여 있는데, 그 안에 마치 금과 은으로 빚어 만든 거 같은 빛까번쩍 한 결혼식 의상이 놓여 있는 거에요.
젊은 왕이 거리로 나아가 막 그 옷을 집어 들려던 찰나에, 충신 요하네스가 왕을 밀치고 나아가 장갑 낀 손으로 그 옷을 집어서는 황급히 불로 가 태워버렸어요.
다시 한 번 수행원들이 수군거리기 시작했어요.
수행원들이 왕께 말했어요.
“보셨지 않습니까, 전하, 감히 전하의 결혼식 의상을 불태우다니요!”
하지만 젊은 왕은 말했어요.
“아니다, 그는 쉬이 그럴 사람이 아니다, 그를 내버려두거라, 그는 내 둘도 없는 충성스런 ‘요하네스’(주인공이름)다.”
이제 결혼식을 엄숙히 올리고 나서, 무도회가 시작되어, 신부(새 왕비)도 춤을 추게 되었다.
그때도 충신 요하네스(주인공)는 주의 깊게 새 왕비의 얼굴을 살피고 있었다. 
갑자기 신부(새 왕비)의 얼굴이 창백하게 변하더니 마치 죽은 것처럼 바닥에 쓰러졌다. 
그 즉시 요하네스(주인공)가 황급히 그녀에게 달려가더니 들어 올려 품에 안고 침실로 들어갔다…. 신부를 눕힌 후 무릎을 꿇곤 신부의 오른쪽 가슴에서 피 세 방울을 빨아 내뱉었다.
그 즉시 신부(새 왕비)가 숨을 다시 쉬며 되살아났다.
하지만 이것을 본 젊은 왕으로선 그토록 충신이던 요하네스가 왜 이러는지 도무지 이해할 수가 없어 화가 나 소리쳤다. 
“저 자를 당장 지하감옥에 가두어라.”
다음날 아침 충신 요하네스(주인공)는 판결을 받고 교수대로 끌려갔다.
높은 곳에 서서 막 형이 집행되려는 순간, 요하네스(주인공)가 말했다.
“사형수도 죽기 전에 마지막 말은 남길 수 있다 들었습니다. 제게도 그 권리가 있는지요?”
“그렇다.”라며 왕이 대답했어요. “그건 네게도 적용된다.”
그러자 충신 요하네스가 말했어요.
“제게 내려진 판결은 부당합니다. 전 언제나 전하께 충심을 다했습니다.”
그러면서 요하네스(주인공)는 자신이 어쩌다 바다 위에서 '큰까마귀'(갈가마귀. 불길한 새로 여겨짐)들의 대화를 듣게 되었는지 그리고 자신의 주군을 구하기 위해 자신이 그러한 모든 행동들을 할 수 밖에 없었다는 것을 고했습니다.
그러자 왕이 소리쳤습니다.
“오, 나의 둘도 없는 충신 요하네스(주인공이름)여. 나를 용서하라, 용서해… 당장 그를 풀어주어라.”
하지만 충신 요하네스는 자신의 마지막 말을 하자마자 숨이 끊어지며 돌로 변하고 말았습니다.
그런 까닭에 왕과 왕비는 심히 괴로웠어요.
그래서 왕이 말했어요.
“아, 충신을 이리도 몰라보다니!”
그래서 왕은 그 돌(요하네스가 변해버린 돌)을 자신의 침실 침대 바로 곁에 갖다 놓게 했어요.
그리곤 종종 그 돌을 쳐다보고 울면서 왕은 말했어요.
“아, 둘도 없는 충신 요하네스를 다시 되살릴 수만 있다면.”
시간이 지나 왕비가 쌍둥이를 낳았어요.
쌍둥이는 두 아들로, 이들이 무럭무럭 크자 왕비는 무척이나 기뻤어요. 
한번은 왕비가 교회를 간 사이, 두 아이가 아빠(왕) 옆에 앉아 놀고 있는 사이에, 왕은 또다시 큰 슬픔에 심취해 돌을 바라다보며 한숨 쉬며 말했어요.
“아, 내 둘도 없는 충신 요하네스를 다시 되살릴 수만 있다면.”
그때 돌이 말을 하기 시작하면서 이렇게 애기했어요.
“전하께서 가장 아끼시는 것을 바치신다면 제 목숨을 다시 되살릴 수 있사옵니다.”
그러자 왕이 큰 소리로 말했어요.
“자네를 위해서라면 내가 가진 모든 걸 바치겠네.”
돌이 계속 말을 이어갔습니다.
“만약 전하께서 전하의 손으로 직접 두 아드님의 머리를 베셔서 그 피를 제게 끼얹으신다면 제가 다시 소생할 수 있사옵니다.”
자신이 직접 자신이 가장 아끼는 두 아들을 죽여야 한다는 그 말에 왕은 소름이 돋았어요.
하지만 곧 자신에게 충성을 다했던 요하네스가 어떻게 죽게 되었는지를 떠올리곤, 검을 뽑아 두 아들의 목을 직접 내리쳤어요.
그런 다음 두 아들의 피를 돌에 바르자, 돌에 생기가 돌더니, 곧 충신 요하네스가 예전의 건강하던 모습을 되찾았어요.
요하네스(주인공)가 왕에게 말했어요.
“전하의 진정성은 보답을 받을 것입니다.”
그러면서 요하네스(주인공)가 두 왕자님의 머리를 집어 들어 다시 몸 위에 올려놓자 상처가 피로 아물며 즉시 두 왕자님들의 생명이 돌아와, 왕자님들이 깡충깡충 뛰며 아무 일도 없었다는 듯 계속 뛰어놀기 시작했어요.
그러자 왕은 대만족했고, 왕비가 돌아오는 것을 보고, 왕은 충신 요하네스와 두 왕자를 큰 벽장 속에 숨겼어요.
왕비가 들어오자, 왕이 왕비에게 말했어요.
“교회에서 기도를 잘 하고 왔소이까?”
“네,”라며 왕비가 말했어요. “하지만 충신 요하네스 생각이 계속 났어요, 저희 때문에 그에게 닥친 불행 말이에요.”
그러자 왕이 말했어요.
“사랑하는 아내여, 우리가 그를 다시 살릴 수 있는 방도가 있소이다. 하지만 그 대가로 우린 두 어린 아들들을 제물로 받쳐야하오.” 
왕비는 얼굴이 새파래지고 놀라움(공포)에 얼어버렸어요.
하지만 곧 왕비가 말했어요.
“그(충신 요하네스)의 충심 덕분이죠.”
자신이 생각했던 것을 왕비도 똑같이 생각한 것을 보고 왕은 기뻐하며 가서 벽장 문을 열고 왕비 앞에 충신 요하네스와 두 아들들을 데령했어요.
왕이 말했어요.
“신을 찬미할지고(=기쁘게도), 그(충신 요하네스)가 소생했소이다. 그리고 우리 두 귀여운 아들들도 마찬가지로 말이오.”  
그리고 왕은 그 사이에 있었던 모든 걸 왕비에게도 말해주었어요.
그런 다음 그들은 머리가 파뿌리가 될 때까지(죽을 때까지) 다함께 아주 행복하게 잘 살았답니다.

(끝)

동화 「충신 요하네스」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「충신 요하네스」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter6.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



7. 꽤 괜찮은 흥정



예전에, 시장으로 자신의 암소를 끌고 가 독일은화 7개와 바꾼 농부가 한 명 있었어요.  
집으로 돌아오는 길에 연못을 지나가게 되었더랬죠.
그런데 저 멀리에서부터 개구리들의 울음소리가 들려오는 거예요.
“아크, 아크, 아크, 아크.” (독일개구리는 개굴개굴이 아니라 “쿠아크쿠아크”라고 운다네요. 충격적인 사실 *_* 네이버지식인참조 ? https://goo.gl/B8mgwO )
“글쎄,”라며 농부가 속으로 말했어요. “저 개구리들이 아무 까닭도 리듬도 없이 내가 ‘여덟’(여덟의 독일발음이 /아흐트/ . 개구리 울음 소리 뒷부분 ‘아크’와 ‘아흐트’가 비슷하죠 ^^ㅋㅋ 내가 해석하고도 너무 어그지인 거 같기도 -_-;;)에 팔았다지만, 난 여덟이 아니라 일곱 개 받고 팔은 걸.”
그래서 농부는 연못가로 가 개구리들에게 소리쳤어요.
“이 멍청 멍청 멍멍 청한 동물들아! 멍청하면 다냐? 내가 받은 소 값은 팔이 아니라 일곱이야.”
하지만 개구리들은 여전히 이렇게 우길 뿐이었다. 
“아크, 아크, 아크, 아크.” (독일개구리는 개굴개굴이 아니라 “쿠아크쿠아크”라고 운다네요. 네이버지식인참조 ? https://goo.gl/B8mgwO )
“아이참, 너희들 그렇게도 내 말을 못 믿겠니. 그럼 내가 너희들 앞에서 세어줄게.”
그래서 농부는 호주머니에서 돈을 꺼니 하나씩 헤아리기 시작해, 그것이 독일은화 4개와, ‘작은 은화’(그로센. 독일의 옛날 화폐단위) 20개로 이루어진 영락없는, 7개의 은화라는 것을 증명해보였다.
하지만 그럼에도 불구하고 개구리들은 농부의 계산에는 아량곳 않고 오로지 이렇게 외쳐대기에 바빴다. 
“아크, 아크, 아크, 아크.” (독일개구리는 개굴개굴이 아니라 “쿠아크쿠아크”라고 운다네요. 네이버지식인참조 ? https://goo.gl/B8mgwO )
“이것들이,”라며 농부는 화가 머리끝까지 나 소리쳤다. “나보다 너희들이 산수를 더 잘한다고 우기를 거니. 그럼 자 너희들이 직접 세려 봐.”
그러면서 손에 쥐고 있던 은화들을 몽땅 개구리들이 있는 연못에 던지고 말았다. 
농부는 한동안 그 자리에 서 있었다.
개구리들이 셈을 끝낸 다음 은화들을 자신에게 돌려주리라 기대했기 때문이었다.
하지만 개구리들은 그저 자기 의견만 내세우며 죽으라고 똑같은 소리로 울어대기만 바빴다.
“아크, 아크, 아크, 아크.” (독일개구리는 개굴개굴이 아니라 “쿠아크쿠아크”라고 운다네요. 네이버지식인참조 ▶ https://goo.gl/B8mgwO )
게다가 이놈(개구리)들은 돈을 던져주지도 않았다. 
농부는 한참을 그 자리에 서 있다가, 저녁이 다 되자 어쩔 수 없이 집으로 돌아올 수 밖에 없었다. 
그때 농부가 개구리들을 욕하며 내뱉은 말이 다음과 같다.
“이 첨벙쟁이(물을 튀기는 동물)들이, 이 머리 큰 놈들이, 이 눈알 큰 놈들, 그 큰 입으로 귀 아프도록 잘도 질러댔겠다, 은화 7개도 못 세리는 놈들이, 무슨! 너희들(개구리들)이 셈을 끝낼 때까지 내가 여기 계속 있을 줄 알았겠지?”
그러면서 농부는 휭 하니 가버렸다. 
물론 개구리들은 그런 거엔 전혀 아랑곳 않고 그저 다음과 같이 외쳐대기 바빴다. 
“아크, 아크, 아크, 아크.” (독일개구리는 개굴개굴이 아니라 “쿠아크쿠아크”라고 운다네요. 네이버지식인참조 ▶ https://goo.gl/B8mgwO )
개구리들의 울음소리는 농부가 화가 나 씩씩거리며 집에 도착할 때까지 계속 이어졌다. 
며칠 지나서, 농부는 다른 암소 한 마리를 사들이고는, 도축한(죽인) 다음, 얻은 고기로 자신이 내다 판다면 얼마만큼을 벌 수 있는지 계산을 해보았는데 자그마치 2마리 암소를 내다판 것과 같다는 결론에 도달했다. 게다가 소의 가죽까지 공짜로 얻을 수 있었던 것이다. 
그리하여 도축한 소의 고기를 들고서 시내로 나갔더니, 문 앞에 한 무리의 개들이 모여들더니 농부가 든 고기를 보고는 좋아 날뛰며 코로 흥흥거리며 냄새를 맡고 다음과 같이 짖어대기 바빴다. 
“바우, 바우, 바우.” (개가 “멍멍” 짖는 소리가 독일에서는 “바우 바우”라네요. 네이버독일어사전참조 ? https://goo.gl/l21VPy )
개떼의 우두머리는 몸집이 아주 큰 ‘그레이하운드’(사냥개. 사진링크 ? https://goo.gl/bzPAxa )였어요.
이 커다란 그레이하운드(사냥개)가 꿈쩍도 않고서 그러자, 농부가 개에게 말했어요.
“알았다, 알았어, 그러니까 이 소고기를 ‘바스(=좀만), 바스, 바스,’(바스는 독일어로 ‘좀만’입니다. 네이버독일어사전참조 ? https://goo.gl/fsB5wi ) 달라는 거지. 너도 이 소고기를 맛보고 싶다 이거지. 하지만 이걸 너희들에게 주고 나면 그럼 난 뭐 먹고 살라는 거니.”
하지만 그레이하운드(사냥개)의 대답은 오로지 “바우, 바우.” (개가 “멍멍” 짖는 소리가 독일에서는 “바우 바우”라네요. 네이버독일어사전참조 ? https://goo.gl/l21VPy )일 뿐이었다.
“그럼 나랑 약속해라, 이 소고기들을 다 먹지 않고, 그리고 네 친구들이 먹는 몫의 가격까지 네가 보증을 서 주겠노라고, 그럴 거지?”
“바우, 바우, 바우.”(=“멍, 멍, 멍.”)라고 그레이하운드(사냥개)가 말했다. 
“알았다, 네가 분명 그러겠노라고 약속한 거다, 그럼 자 여기 이 소고기를 네게 맡기겠다. 난 너도 잘 알지만 네 주인도 아주 잘 알고 있다. 다시 한 번 네게 말하건대, 내 돈은 3~4일 정도 있다 받으러 갈 테니 그때 내게 값을 치르면 된다.”
그래서 농부는 짐을 풀고서 소고기를 개에게 주었고 갔던 길을 다시 돌아왔어요.
물론 개들은 소고기에 와락 덤벼들며 이렇게 짖어대느라 바빴어요.
“바우, 바우.” (=“멍, 멍.”) 
이 소리를 들으며 농부는 속으로 생각했어요.
“잘 됐네, 조금씩 모두(=개들) 맛을 봤을 테지만, 어쨌든 가장 큰 개가 값을 지불하겠지.”
3일이 지난 후, 농부는 생각했어요.
“오늘밤엔 소고기 값이 내 주머니 속으로 들어오겠지.”
농부는 아주 기뻤어요.
하지만 아무도 와서 소고기 값을 지불하지 않는 거예요.
“믿을 놈 한 명도 없다더니.”라고 농부는 말했어요.
결국 화가 난 농부가 시내로 가 푸주한(정육점) 주인에게 자신의 돈을 달라고 말했어요.
푸주한(정육점) 주인은 농부가 농담한다고 생각했어요.
하지만 농부가 “농담 아냐, 내 돈 내 놓으라고! 큰 개가 내가 잡은 소의 고기를 3일 전에 몽땅 가져갔잖아?”
그러자 푸주한(정육점) 주인이 버럭 화를 내며 빗자루를 집어 들더니 말 그대로 비오는 날 먼지 나도록 이 농부를 흠뻑 두들겨 패곤 쫓아냈어요.
“두고 보라지,”라며 농부가 말했어요. “아직 이 땅의 도덕이 무너지지 않았다는 걸 증명할 테니까!”
그런 다음 농부는 궁전으로 가 하소연을 했어요.
곧 농부가 왕 앞으로 인도되었고, 왕은 공주와 함께 앉아 있다, 농부를 보자 “무슨 일로 그렇게 상처를 입었느냐?”라고 물어봤어요.
“아아 말도 마십시오!”라며 농부가 말했어요. “글쎄 개구리들과 개들이 제 껄 빼앗아 갔는데도, 푸주한(정육점) 주인이 응당 제게 줘야할 돈은 안 주고 몽둥이찜질을 하지 뭡니까요.”
그러면서 농부는 그 동안 있었던 일을 죄다 왕께 고해바쳤습니다.
그 후 즉시 공주님이 진심 웃기 시작하는 거예요.
그래서 왕이 농부에게 말했어요.
“난 네게 이 사안에 대해 판단을 해줄 수가 없구나, 다만 내 딸을 네 아내로 주겠다… 평생 단 한 번도 웃지 않던 딸이 네 한 마디에 빵 터졌구나. 그렇지 않아도 이 애를 웃게 하는 자가 있음 딸을 주겠다고 약속하던 차이다. 넌 다만 이 행운에 대해 감사해하기만 하면 된다!” 
“오오,”라며 농부가 기겁을 하며 말했다. “그럴 순 없습니다요. 마누라라면 벌써 하나 있는 걸요, 집에 가면요. 한 명도 제겐 너무 벅찹니다. 잔소리가 정말 집안 구석구석 안 들리는 곳이 없을 정도로 끔찍합니다요.”
그러자 왕이 화가 나선 말했다. 
“뭐 저런 머저리 같은 놈이 다 있노.”
“아아, 전하,”라며 농부가 대답했어요. “바보에게 푸념 말고 뭘 더 원하시나이까?”
“됐으니 그만하거라,”라며 왕이 말했어요. “다만 다른 보상을 내어주겠노라. 하지만 지금은 일단 떠났다가 3일 후에 다시 오거라, 그럼 내 너에게 독일은화로 전부 500개를 주겠노라.”
농부가 문을 지나가려는데, 보초병이 말했어요.
“어이 얼뜨기 네가 공주님을 웃겨드렸다며, 그럼 한 몫 단단히 챙기겠구먼.”
“그래, 내 생각도 그래,”라며 농부가 말했어요. “독일은화로 500개가 주신다더군.”
“얼씨구 맙소사,”라며 그 병사가 말했어요. “그 돈 나도 조금 주면 안 돼. 그 많은 돈을 혼자 다 쓸 수가 있겠어?”
“지금 봐선 그래,”라며 농부가 말했어요. “그럼 독일은화 200개를 줄게, 3일 있다가 나대신 임금님께 가봐, 돈을 내어주실 거야.”
옆에 서 있다 이 대화를 엿듣게 된 유대인 한 명이 농부를 뒤쫓아 가 외투자락을 부여잡으며 말했다. 
“아이고 맙소사! 이 이쁜 나리가 다 있남! 내가 그 돈을 작은 독일은화들로 다 바꿔주겠네, 수수료 조금만 떼고 내 다 바꿔줌세, 그 큰돈인 독일은화들로 뭘 하겠나?”
“유대인이군.”라며 농부가 말했어요. “아직 300개의 독일은화가 남아 있으니까 그걸 당신에게 몽땅 주리다, 잔돈으로 바꿔주쇼, 지금부터 3일 있다 가보면 임금님께서 당신에게 돈을 내어주실 게요.”
유대인은 이득 볼 생각기뻐하며, 작은 독일은화들 중에서도 동전의 질이 나빠 3개를 건네주면 겨우 2개로 바꿔주는 작은 독일은화들로만 농부에게 건네주었어요.
3일이 지나자, 왕의 어명을 지키기 위해, 농부가 왕 앞에 대령했어요.
“외투를 벗고,”라며 왕이 말했어요. “독일은화 500개를 담거라.”
“아!”라며 농부가 말했어요. “이제 더 이상 그 돈은 제 돈이 아닙니다. 200개는 보초병에게 제가 주었고, 나머지 300개는 유대인이 제게 잔돈으로 바꿔주었거든요. 그러니 응당 제가 받을 건 더 이상 없습니다요.”
농부와 거의 동시에, 보초병과 유대인도 또한 들어와 각자 자기들이 농부한테서 받기로 한 것을 요구하다, 받기로 한 독일은화 개수만큼의 매를 모질게 받았어요.
매가 아프다는 걸 이미 잘 알고 있던 병사(보초병)는 참고 견뎠지만, 유대인은 비통해하며 말했어요.
“아이고, 아이고, 이게 주신다는 묵직한 독일은화란 말입니까?”
 하지만 왕도 농부의 등장에 웃지 않을 수가 없어 모든 화가 풀려서 말했어요.
“네 보상금을 받기도 전에 다 잃어버렸으니, 내 다른 걸 덤으로 주겠노라. 보물 창고에 가서 까짓것 한 번 담아가 보거라.”
농부로선 두 말할 필요도 없었다. 보물창고로 가 자신의 호주머니들 속에 꽉꽉 채웠다.
그 후 농부는 주막에 도착해 자신이 보물창고에서 가지고 온 돈을 세리기 시작했다. 
살금살금 농부의 뒤를 쫓아온 유대인은, 농부가 뭐라 중얼거리고 있는지를 엿들었다. 
농부가 중얼거렸다. 
“깡패 같은 전하께서 결국 나를 놀려먹으셨네, 그냥 직접 얼마 주신다고 하면서 주시면 얼마인줄은 알지, 이건 뭐 내가 담아왔더니 세릴 수가 있어야지? 도대체 운 좋게도 내 호주머니들 속에 담아온 이 돈들이 얼마란 거야? 이걸 내가 어떻게 세려?”
“옳다구나!”라고 유대인은 속으로 생각했다. “네 놈이 감히 존엄하신 전하의 성은을 그 딴 식으로 말해. 내 당장 가서 고자질해야지, 그럼 저 보상금들은 다 내 게 될 거야, 넌 당연히 벌을 받을 거고. (ㅋㅋ)”
왕이 유대인의 입을 통해 농부가 한 말을 전해 듣자 버럭 화를 내며 유대인보고 “냉큼 가서 그 무례한 놈을 데리고 오거라.”라고 말씀하셨다. 
유대인은 농부에게 달려갔다.
“자넨 지금 당장 전하께 가야하네. 입고 있는 옷 그대로 말이야.”
“그보단,”라며 농부가 대답했다. “돈도 받았으니 새 옷부터 하나 걸쳐 입고 가겠네. 호주머니에 이렇게 돈이 많은 자가 이 외투 꼬락서니로 간다는 게 말이 되겠나?” 
입고 나갈 마땅한 다른 외투가 없다며 섣불리 움직이려하지 않는 걸 본 유대인으로선 이러다 왕의 노여움이 사그라질까 두려웠고 그럼 보상금을 잃게 될 거고 농부도 벌을 안 받게 될 것이 뻔해 우선 이렇게 말을 했다. 
(유대인의 대사→) “그럼 우리 순수한 우정의 이름으로 내 외투를 자네에게 잠시 빌려줌세. 우정을 위해서라면 뭘 못하겠나!” 
농부는 이 제안에 만족해하며 유대인이 준 외투를 걸쳐 입은 다음 그와 함께 출발했어요.
유대인이 고해바친 대로 자신에 대해 악담을 한 농부를 왕이 꾸짖었어요.
“아,”라며 농부가 말했어요. “○○인이 말하는 건 죄다 거짓말입니다요… 이 자의 입에서 나오는 말들 중 사실인 건 하나도 없사옵니다요! 이 악당은, 제가 지금 입고 있는 이 옷도 자기 외투라고 유길 놈인 걸요.”
“뭐가 어째?”라며 유대인이 새된(=날카로운) 소리를 질렀어요. “이 외투가 내게 아니라고? 당신이 전하 앞에 나갈 수 있도록 내가 우정 어쩌고 하며 빌려준 거잖아?”
왕이 그 말을 듣자 말했어요.
“그 말인즉슨 저 유대인이 지금 나 아니면 농부를 속이고 있는 게 분명하다.”
그러면서 왕은 그 유대인에게 ‘뜨거운 독일은화 맛’(=매질)을 또 맛보게 했어요.
하지만 농부로 말할 거 같으면, 근사한 외투에 호주머니엔 은화를 가득 넣고서 집으로 돌아가게 되었지요.
농부가 집으로 가면서 속으로 소근 거렸어요.
“이번엔 꽤 괜찮은 흥정을 했는걸!” (ㅋㅋㅋ ^0^)

(끝)

동화 「꽤 괜찮은 흥정」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「꽤 괜찮은 흥정」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter7.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



8. 경탄할 만한 연주가



■ 미리알림

이번 동화(경탄할 만한 연주가)는 재미가 없을 수 있습니다. 특별한 줄거리가 없고, 그냥 뛰어난 연주가가 산을 넘다 음악 연주를 했다는 내용입니다.

(분문 시작)

경탄할 만한 연주가

옛날에 온갖 종류의 것들을 생각하면서 깊은 숲 속을 홀로 걷던 경탄할 만한 실력의 연주가 한 명이 있었어요.
그런데 생각할 게 다 떨어지자 연주가가 혼자 말했어요.
“슬슬 발걸음이 무거워지기 시작하는걸, 같이 걸어줄 친구나 한 명 불러야겠다.”
그러면서 가방에서 자신의 바이올린을 꺼내 연주를 시작했어요.
그래서 숲 속 가득 메아리가 울러 퍼졌어요. 
오래지 않자 늑대 한 마리가 수풀들 사이를 헤치며 빠른 걸음으로 다가오고 있는 게 보였어요.
“아, 늑대잖아! 늑대를 부른 게 아닌데!”라며 연주가가 말했어요.
하지만 늑대는 좀 더 가까이 다가오더니 연주가에게 말했어요.
“아, 친애하는 연주가님, 당신의 켜는 울림이 어찌나 아름다운지. 저도 한 번 당신의 연주를 배워보고 싶습니다.”
“빨리 배우려면,”라고 연주가가 대답했어요. “내가 하란 대로만 하면 돼.”
“오, 연주가님,”라며 늑대가 말했어요. “학생이 선생님을 따르듯 당신께 복종할게요.”
연주가는 늑대보고 따라오라고 말했다. 
그래서 그들이 함께 길을 가는 도중에 오래되어 가운데가 움푹 들어가 있고 속이 텅 빈 떡갈나무 하나가 나왔다. 
“자,”라며 연주가가 말했어요. “만약 바이올린을 배우고 싶다면, 여기 이 갈라진 틈새 사이에 네 앞발들을 집어 넣거라.”
늑대가 그 말대로 하자, 연주가는 즉시 돌 하나를 집어다가 한 방에 내려쳐 늑대의 두 앞발을 틈새 사이에 끼어버렸다. 
너무도 빠른 동작에 늑대는 미처 손 쓸 틈도 없이 죄수마냥 거기 머물려야했다.
“내가 다시 돌아올 때까지 거기 있거라.”라며 연주가가 말하곤 제 갈 길을 가 버렸다. 
잠시 후 연주가가 다시 혼자 말했어요.
“여기까지 왔더니 다리가 무겁기 시작하는 걸, 친구를 한 명 불러내야겠다.”
그러면서 자신의 바이올린을 꺼내 숲에서 연주를 또 하였어요.
머지않아 여우 한 마리가 나무들 사이를 헤치며 네 발로 기어 연주가 쪽으로 다가왔어요.
“아, 여우가 나타났잖아!”라며 연주가가 말했어요. “내가 바란 건 저게 아닌데.”
여우가 연주가에게 다가와 말했어요. “오, 친애하는 연주가님, 어찌 그리도 연주를 아름답게 잘 하시나요! 저도 한 번 배워보고 싶어요.”
“금방 배우려면,”라고 연주가가 말했어요. “내가 하라는 대로만 하면 돼.”
“오, 연주가님,”라며 여우가 말했어요. “학생이 선생님을 따르듯 당신께 복종할게요.”
“그럼 나를 따라와 봐,”라며 연주가가 말했어요. 
그렇게 그들이 길을 가는 도중에, 양 옆으로 큰 관목(진달래가 관목임)이 서 있는 샛길이 하나 나왔어요.
연주가는 길에 서더니, 어린 개암나무를 한 쪽 방향으로 구부려 땅에 고정시킨 다음, 자신의 발로 그 구부러진 개암나무 위를 꾸욱 밟았어요.
그런 다음 어린 나무 하나를 다른 쪽 방향으로 구부리더니 역시 다른 발로 그 어린 나무 위를 꾸욱 밟았어요.
그러고 나서 연주가가 말했어요. 
“자 귀여운 여우야, 바이올린을 배우려면, 여기다 네 왼쪽 앞발을 갖다 대어라.”
여우가 그 말대로 하자, 연주가는 여우의 왼쪽 앞발을 왼쪽 나뭇가지에 묶어 맺어요.
“착한 여우야,”라며 연주가가 말했어요. “이제 네 오른쪽 앞발을 다오.”
그러곤 연주가는 여우의 오른쪽 앞발을 오른쪽 나뭇가지에 꽁꽁 묶었어요.
단단히 묶었는지 확인한 다음 연주가가 휙 가버리자, 그 순간 나뭇가지들이 쑥 원래대로 솟아나면서 자그마한 체구의 여우를 양쪽 방향에서 확 잡아 당겼어요.
그 바람에 여우는 공주에 엑스(X) 자로 매달린 채 발버둥을 치었더랬죠.
“내가 다시 올 때까지 거기서 기다리려무나.”라고 연주가는 말을 하곤 그냥 “쑹!”하고 제 갈 길을 가 버렸어요.
잠시 후 연주가가 혼자말로 속삭였어요.
“숲 여기까지 왔더니 다리가 무거워지기 시작하네, 친구를 한 명 불러내야겠다.”
그래서 연주가는 자신의 바이올린을 꺼내 연주했고 곧 숲에 가득 메아리가 울렸어요.
그러자 귀여운 산토끼 한 마리가 연주가 쪽으로 튀어나왔어요.
“이런, 산토끼가 왔잖아,”라며 연주가가 말했어요. “내가 바란 건 저게 아닌데.”
“아, 친애하는 연주가님,”라며 산토끼가 말했어요. “소리가 어찌나 아름다운지요. 저도 한 번 배워보고 싶어요.”
“얼른 배우고 싶음,”라며 연주가가 말했어요. “내가 하라는 대로 뭐든 하기만 하면 돼.”
“오, 연주가님,”라며 그 귀여운 산토끼가 대답했어요. “학생이 선생님을 따르듯 당신께 복종할게요.”
그들이 그렇게 함께 가는 도중에 숲의 빈 공터가 나왔어요. 거기엔 포플러 나무 하나가 서 있었어요.
연주가는 귀여운 산토끼의 목에 기다란 끈을 하나 묶더니, 그 끈의 다른 쪽 끝을 포플러 나무에 묶었어요.
“자 팔팔하고 귀여운 산토끼야, 어서 이 나무 주위를 20바퀴 뛰어보렴!”라고 연주가가 말했어요.
그래서 그 귀여운 산토끼는 복종하며, 나무 주위를 20바퀴 뛰었어요.
그렇게 뱅뱅 돌다보니 나무줄기에 끈이 20번이나 감긴 그 귀여운 산토끼가 끈에 감겨 나무에 매달리고 말았어요.  
그래서 산토끼가 자신을 감은 끈을 밀어도 보고 당겨도 보았지만 그러면 그럴수록 자신의 부드러운 목을 끈이 조일 뿐이었어요.
“내가 돌아올 때까지 기다리렴.”라며 연주가는 말하곤 그냥 “쑹~!”하고 제 갈 길을 가 버렸어요.
한편 늑대는 돌을 밀어 움직이고 당기고 물고하면서 오랜 시간 끝에 자신의 앞발들을 자유롭게 한 결과 나무 틈새에서 발을 뺄 수가 있었어요.
화와 분노가 머리끝까지 난 늑대는 부랴부랴 연주가가 갔던 방향으로 쫓아가며 만나는 즉시 갈가리 찢어놓고 말겠다고 맹세했어요.
늑대가 뛰어가는 모습을 본 여우가 울며불며 애원을 했어요.
“늑대 형씨, 제발 나 좀 살려줘. 연주가가 나를 이 꼴로 만들었지 뭐야!”
늑대는 작은 나무(=관목)들을 아래로 끌어당겨 여우의 앞발들을 묶은 끈을 입으로 끊어 여우를 다시 자유롭게 해주었어요.
그들은 이제 함께 연주가가 갔던 방향으로 뛰어가며 복수를 벼루였어요.
그러다 곧 그들은 묶인 산토끼를 발견하곤 풀어주었고요.
그리하여 셋은 적을 찾아 뛰었어요.
연주가는 길을 가는 도중에 한 번 더 자신의 바이올린을 꺼내 연주를 했어요.
그리고 이번엔 운이 좋았더래죠.
왜냐면 바이올린 소리가 가난한 나무꾼의 귀에 가 닿았거든요. 
아름다운 소리를 듣자마자 나무꾼은 즉시 하던 일을 멈추고 도끼를 겨드랑이에 낀 채 음악소리가 들리는 곳으로 왔어요.
“마침내 좋은 친구가 왔군,”라며 연주가가 말했어요. “왜냐하면 이제껏 사람 친구를 찾고 있었거든. 야생동물 말고 말이지.”
그래서 기분이 좋아진 연주가가 바이올린을 더 아름답게 더 흥겹게 연주하기 시작하자, 나무꾼은 정말이지 마법에라도 홀린 듯 그 자리에 서서 기쁨으로 쿵쾅쿵쾅 거리는 자신(나무꾼)의 심장을 느끼고 있었답니다.
나무꾼이 그렇게 서 있는데, 늑대와 여우와 산토끼가 불쑥 튀어나왔어요.
나무꾼이 보니, 그들 야생짐승의 눈에 살기(나쁜 눈빛)가 가득했어요.
그래서 나무꾼은 자신의 반짝이는 도끼를 들곤 연주가 앞에 자리를 잡고 섰어요.
나무꾼이 마치 이렇게 말하는 듯 보였어요.
“누군들 이 분(연주가)께 손 끝 하나 까딱하려는 자는 이 도끼 맛을 봐야 할 게다!”
그러자 야생짐승들이 잔뜩 겁을 집어 먹곤 지금까지 왔던 숲속 길로 다시 달아나 버렸어요.
자신을 구해준 것에 대한 보답을 하고자 연주가는 나무꾼에게 바이올린 연주를 한 번 더 들려주고 난 다음 가던 길을 계속 갔답니다. (보셨죠? 정말 줄거리가 없는 내용이었습니다. 제가 해석하고 나서도 살짝 당황했음 ㅋㅋ...^^)
 
(끝)
동화 「경탄할 만한 연주가」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「경탄할 만한 연주가」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter8.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥


9. 열두 오빠들



■ 미리알림

이번 동화(열두 오빠들)는 재밌습니다. 마법적인 요소(얘기)도 살짝 깃들여져 있고 불행했다가 행복했다가 하는 게 영락없는 동화네요. 굿~ 강추~

(분문 시작)

열두 오빠들

옛날 옛적에, 열두(12) 아이들과 함께 행복하게 살고 있던 왕과 왕비가 있었어요.
아이들은 모두 소년들이었어요.
그러다 한 번은 왕이 왕비에게 말했어요.
“이번에 당신이 낳는 13번째 아이가 여자애라면, 내 12 아들들을 죽일 테요, 딸애에게 가는 유산이 많게 하고 이 왕국도 그 애 혼자 물려받게 하기 위해서요.”
왕은 게다가 또 관 12개를 만들게 하곤 대팻밥으로 관 안을 가득 채운 다음 시신용 작은 베개들까지 관 안에 하나씩 놓아두었어요.
그런 다음 왕은 관을 넣어둔 방을 잠그곤 그 열쇠를 왕비에게 주며 누구에게도 이 사실을 말하지 말라고 말했어요.
하지만 이를 계기로 엄마(왕비)는 오랫동안 비탄에 잠겨 앉아 있었어요.
급기야 엄마 곁에 붙어 있던 ‘벤야민’(=영어의 ‘벤저민.’ 성경에 나오는 요셉의 동생)이라는 막내아들이 엄마에게 이렇게 말하기에 이르렀어요. 벤야민은 성경에 나오는 이름이에요.(←원문에 있는 문장임)
“사랑하는 엄마, 요즘 왜 그리 슬프세요?”
“아가야,”라며 엄마(왕비)가 답했어요. “네겐 알려줄 수 없는 거란다.”
하지만 벤야민(막내아들)은 계속 졸랐고 그래서 엄마는 막내를 데리고 그 방으로 가 열쇠로 열곤 대팻밥으로 채워져 있는 12개의 관들을 보여주었어요.
그런 다음 엄마는 사랑하는 막내아들 벤야민에게, “이 관들은 모두 아빠가 너희들 12형제들을 위해 준비해놓은 거란다. 왜냐면 내가 딸아이를 낳으면 너희들을 죽여 이 관에다 묻을 작정인 게지.”라고 말해주었어요.
이 얘기를 들려주는 내내 엄마(왕비)는 울었어요, 그래서 아들(벤야민)은 엄마를 위로하며 이렇게 말했어요.
“울지 마, 사랑하는 엄마, 우리들이 여기서 나가서 살아보도록 할게.”
그러자 왕비가 말했어요. 
“네 11명의 형들과 함께 숲 속으로 가거라, 거기 가서 가장 높은 나무에 한 명은 항상 앉아 성이 있는 이쪽 탑을 바라보고 있거라. 만약 내가 막내로 아들을 낳으면 흰 깃발을 내걸겠다 그럼 너희들은 안전하게 다시 돌아와도 된다. 하지만 내가 딸아이를 낳으면, 내가 빨간 깃발을 걸테니, 그땐 너희들은 가능한 한 빨리 달아나거라, 하느님께서 너희들을 돌봐 주실 것이다. 그리고 나도 너희 형제들을 위해 밤 기도를 올리겠다… 너희들이 겨울에 난로에서 따뜻하게 몸을 녹일 수 있도록, 그리고 너희들이 여름엔 더위를 떨쳐버릴 수 있도록 말이다.”
왕비가 왕자들을 위한 기도를 올린 후, 왕자들은 숲으로 향했어요.
그날부터 왕자들은 교대로 망을 봤답니다. 높은 떡갈나무 위에 앉아 성의 탑을 바라보았어요.
11일이 지나고 벤야민(막내이름)의 차례가 되어 망을 보고 있는데 깃발 하나가 탑 위로 올라갔어요.
하지만 그건 흰 깃발이 아니라, 왕자 모두 죽게 될 것을 알리는 새빨간 깃발이었어요.
이 소식을 전해들은 형들은 아주 화가 나서 말했어요.
“우리가 왜 여동생 하나 때문에 죽어야 하는데? 복수하자!… 지금부터 만나는 여자애는 누구든 피가 낭자하게 될 거야.”
그런 까닭에 왕자들은 더 깊숙이 숲으로 들어갔고, 어두운 숲 한 가운데서 마법에 걸린 작은 오두막 한 채를 발견했어요.
오두막은 비어있었어요.
형(왕자)들이 말했어요.
“우리 여기서 살자, 그리고 너 벤야민(막내이름)야, 네가 제일 어리고 약하니까 넌 집에 머물며 살림을 맡아, 형들은 밖으로 가서 먹을 것을 챙겨볼게.”
그리하여 형들은 숲으로 가서 산토끼나, 야생사슴, 새, 그리고 비둘기 등등 먹을만한 거면 뭐든지 사냥해 벤야민(막내이름)에게 가져다주었어요.
그럼 벤야민은 형들이 허기를 달래 수 있게 음식을 차렸어요.
그렇게 그들은 길지 않은 시간인 10년을 이 자그마한 오두막에서 살았어요.
왕자들의 엄마인 왕비가 낳은 사랑스런 딸도 이제 다 컸어요.
그녀는 마음씨가 상냥하고 얼굴도 예뻤어요. 이마 위에 황금별이 하나 있는 아이였어요.
한 번은 그녀가 빨래를 하는데 옷들 사이에 남자 애 셔츠가 12개 있는 거예요. 그래서 엄마에게 물었어요.
“이 12 셔츠들은 누구의 거야, 이 옷들은 아빠가 입기엔 너무 작은데?”
그러자 왕비가 무거운 마음이 되어 대답했어요.
“얘야, 이거들은 네 12 오라비들의 것이란다.”
소녀가 말했어요.
“내 12 오빠라고, 그런 얘긴 한 번도 안 했잖아?”
왕비가 대답했어요.
“하느님이 보살필게다, 지금쯤 세상 여기저기를 떠돌고 있을 테니.”
왕비는 소녀를 데리고 방문 하나를 열어 대팻밥들로 가득 차고 베개까지 놓여있는 12개의 관을 보여주었어요.
“이건 관이란다,”라며 왕비가 말했어요. “네 오라비들의 맞이할 운명이었는데, 네가 태어나자마자 모두들 도망쳤단다.”
왕비는 그때 있었던 모든 것을 딸에게 알려주었어요.
그러자 소녀가 말했어요.
“사랑하는 엄마, 울지 마, 내가 가서 오빠들을 찾아볼게.”
그리하여 공주는 12개의 셔츠를 가지고 여행을 떠나 곧장 울창한 숲으로 향했어요.
하루 종일 걸어 저녁 무렵에 마법에 걸린 그 오두막에 도착했어요.
공주가 안으로 들어가 보니 소년 한 명이 있었는데, 그 소년은 그녀가 너무도 아름답고 왕족의 의상을 입고 이마에 별이 있는 것을 보곤 깜짝 놀라하며, “어디서 오셨죠, 어디로 가시든 길이죠?”라고 물었어요.
소녀가 대답했어요.
“전 공주예요, 제 12 오빠들을 찾고 있었어요. 하늘만큼 땅만큼 걷다 여기를 발견했어요.”
공주는 또한 왕자들이 입던 셔츠 12개도 소년에게 보여주었어요.
그러자 벤야민(막내오빠)이 그녀가 자신의 여동생인 걸 알아보곤 말했어요.
“난 벤야민이야, 네 막내오빠야.”
소녀가 기쁨의 눈물을 흘리기 시작하자 벤야민도 또한 울었어요.
그들은 넘치는 사랑에 서로 안고 뽀뽀를 했어요.
하지만 곧바로 벤야민이 말했어요.
“동생아, 문제가 하나 있어. 우리 형제들은 만나는 소녀는 누구든 죽이기로 맹세를 했단다, 여동생 때문에 왕국을 떠나와야 했기 때문이지.”
그러자 소녀가 말했어요. 
“기꺼이 죽겠어요. 그래서 오빠들을 구할 수만 있다면요.”
“아니,”라며 벤야민(막내오빠)이 말했어요. “널 죽게 할 순 없어. 일단 11명의 형들이 올 때까지 넌 이 물통 안에 들어가 있어봐, 내가 형들과 타협점을 찾아볼게.”
소녀는 오빠가 하라는 대로 했어요.
밤이 되자 다른 오빠들이 사냥에서 돌아왔고 저녁식사가 차려졌어요.
그들이 모두 식탁 의자에 앉아 식사를 하는 동안 형들이 물었어요.
“무슨 소식 있니?”
벤야민(막내오빠)이 말했어요.
“아무것도 모르는 거야?”
“응,”라며 형들이 대답했어요.
벤야민이 말했어요.
“형들은 숲에 가 있고 난 집에만 있다 보니 아는 게 많아.”
“그럼 얼른 말해봐.”라며 형들이 큰소리로 말했어요.
벤야민이 대답했어요.
“그럼 약속해조, 처음 우리가 마주치는 소녀를 죽이지 않겠다고.”
“그러마.”라고 형들이 외쳤어요. “여인에게 축복 있기를, 자 이제 말해죠.”
그때 벤야민이 말했어요.
“우리 여동생이 여기 와 있어.”
벤야민이 물통을 들어 올리자, 이마에 황금별이 있는 공주가 왕족의 의상을 입고 앞으로 나왔어요.
그녀는 예쁘고 우아하고 공손했어요.
그래서 오빠들 모두는 너무도 기분이 좋아 여동생의 목을 얼싸안으며 진심으로 키스를 해주고 사랑해주었어요.
이제 소녀(주인공)는 벤야민 오빠와 함께 집에 머물며 살림을 도왔어요.
11명의 오빠들은 숲으로 가 사슴과 새와 같은 사냥감을 잡아오거나, 숲에서 키우는 산비둘기들을 잡아 왔어요.
그럼 막내와 벤야민 오빠가 그걸 잡아 오빠들을 위한 음식을 차려주었답니다.
소녀는 요리 때 쓸 장작이나 식용풀잎들을 캐와 불 위 냄비들에 넣었고요, 그래서 11명의 오빠들은 나름 맛있는 저녁을 먹을 수 있었어요.
소녀는 살림도 가지런히 잘 했어요, 오빠들의 침대 위에 있는 이불들도 잘 털어 깔끔하게 정리정도 했어요.
그래서 오빠들은 여동생과 함께 화목하게 만족하며 잘 살았어요. 
하루는 둘(소녀와 막내오빠인 벤야민)이 집에서 나머지 오빠들과 함께 마음껏 먹고 마실 근사한 준비를 하고 있었어요.
하지만, 마법에 걸린 그 오두막에 딸려 있는 작은 뜰, 그러니까 마치 학생들처럼 백합 12개가 서 있는 그 뜰도 마찬가지로 마법에 걸린 뜰이었어요.
소녀는 그 뜰에 있는 12개의 꽃들을 뜯어 저녁식사 때 오빠들에게 식사 맛있게 하라고 선물로 나눠줄 생각이었어요.
소녀가 꽃들을 뜯자마자 동시에 오빠들이 12마리의 큰까마귀로 변해 숲으로 날아가버렸어요. 그리고 오두막과 뜰도 마찬가지로 휑하니 사라지고 말았어요.
그래서 불쌍한 소녀는 이 울창한 숲에 혼자만 남게 되었어요.
소녀가 돌아보니, 한(=1) 노파가 곁에 서 있는데 이렇게 말하는 거예요.
“고얀 것, 니가 했니(네가 그랬니)? 12개의 백합들이 자라게 왜 그냥 두질 않았니? 그건 네 오빠들이다, 이제 영원토록 큰까마귀로 변해버린 네 오빠들.”
소녀가 울면서 말했어요.
“오빠들을 구할 방법은 정녕 없는 건가요?”
“없다,”라며 그 노파가 말했어요. “하지만 딱 한 가지 방법이 있긴 하지, 대신 그 방법은 너를 힘들게 할 게다. 그 방법이 아니고선 네 오빠들을 구할 방법은 없다. 그리고 넌 그 대가로 7년 동안 말을 해선 안 된다. 한 마디도 해선 안 되고 웃어서도 안 된다. 만약 네가 그 7년 중에 단 한 번이라도 말을 했다간 모든 게 허사가 되고 말게다. 그리고 네 오빠들은 네가 한 그 말 한 마디 때문에 죽게 될 게다.”
그때 소녀가 진심에서 우러나오는 말로 이렇게 말했어요.
“제가 꼭 오빠들을 자유의 몸으로 되돌리고 말 거예요.”
그런 다음 소녀는 높은 나무를 찾아 그 안에서 지내며 24시간 내내 말도 하지도 웃지도 않았어요.
한번은 왕이 그 숲에서 사냥을 하는데, 자신의 커다란 그레이하운드(사냥개)가 달려가더니 소녀가 앉아 있는 나무 주변을 돌며 소녀를 향해 킹킹거리며 막 짖어대는 거예요.
왕이 개를 뒤따라 왔다가 이마에 황금별이 있는 아름다운 공주를 보고 말았어요.
그녀의 미모가 정말이지 너무도 매력적이었기 때문에 왕은 소녀보고 자신의 아내가 되어줄 것을 요구했어요.
소녀가 아무런 대답이 없었지만 다만 고개를 살짝 끄떡여보여주었지요.
그래서 왕은 나무 위로 몸소 올라가 그녀를 아래로 데리고 내려와 자신의 말 등에 태워 궁궐로 돌아왔어요.
그런 다음 결혼식이 웅장하고 성대하게 기쁨가득 거행되었어요, 하지만 신부는 말 한 마디나 미소 한 모금 웃지 않았어요.
그들은 몇 년을 함께 행복하게 살았어요.
그런데 문제가 발생했어요. 왕의 어머니가 사악한 시어머니였던 거예요. 시어머니는 젊은 왕비를 중상모략하기 시작했어요. 
그래서 시어머니는 왕께도 이렇게 말했어요.
“저애는 천한 애다, 어디서 저런 애를 데려왔니. 저 애가 몰래 불경한 술수를 쓸지 누가 알겠니! 말 못하는 벙어리라도 웃을 줄을 안다. 그런데 저 애는 웃지도 않는다. 뭔가 꿍꿍이 속이 있는 게 분명해.”
처음엔 왕도 그 말을 믿지 않았지만, 어머니가 이와 같은 얘기들을 오랫동안 하는 바람에 결국 왕은 수많은 죄목들을 들어 왕비를 고소했어요.
그리곤 왕비가 확신범이라고 왕 자기 자신이 스스로 믿게 만들고는 왕비에게 사형을 선고했어요.
이제 이글거리는 화염(=불)이 그녀를 집어삼킬 듯 안마당에서 넘실거리고 있었어요.
그리고 눈물이 가득한 두 눈으로 창가에 선 왕이 그 광경을 내려다보고 있었어요.
왜냐하면 왕은 여전히 왕비를 너무도 많이 사랑했기 때문이죠.
위험이 빠르게 다가오고, 화염이 이제 시뻘건 혓바닥(-불길)을 내밀며 그녀의 옷을 핥아 먹는 순간 천만 다행이게도 7년이라는 기한이 만료되었던 거예요.
그러자 푸드덕푸드덕 하는 날갯짓 소리가 공중에서 들려오더니, 저 하늘에서부터 12 마리의 큰까마귀들이 궁전을 향해 날아 내려와 앉았는데, 이 큰까마귀들의 발이 땅에 닿자마자 12명의 오빠들로 변했어요. 
그녀가 구한 오빠들이었던 거예요.
그들(오빠들)은 불을 갈기갈기 찢어 화염을 끈 다음 사랑하는 여동생을 풀어준 후 얼싸안고 키스를 해주었어요.
이리하여 이제 그녀가 감히 용기를 내어 입을 열자 말이 튀어나왔어요.
그녀가 왕께 왜 자신이 벙어리여야 했는지 왜 자신이 절대 웃어서는 안 되었는지를 얘기했어요. 
그녀가 죄가 없다는 얘기를 들은 왕은 너무도 기뻤어요.
그리하여 그들은 죽을 때까지 대동단결을 이루며 잘 살았어요.
이 일이 있고 왕의 사악한 새어머니(시어머니. 왕의 어머니가 친어머니가 아니었던 모양이네요)는 재판관 앞으로 붙들려갔어요.
왕의 새어머니는 끊는 기름과 악의에 찬 독뱀들로 가득 찬 통 속에 넣어졌어요.
사악한 자가 사악한 죽음을 맞이한 경우랍니다.

(끝)

동화 「열두 오빠들」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「열두 오빠들」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter9.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥


10. 건달들의 무리



하루는 수탉(남자건달)이 암탉(여자건달)에게 말했다. 
“나무열매들이 익어 가는 계절이 왔는데 슬슬 언덕에 같이 가서 배나 잔뜩 채우고 돌아올까. 다람쥐들이 다 따 먹기 전에 말이야.”
“그래,”라며 암탉이 대답했어요. “어서, 기똥차게 놀고 오자고.”
그리하여 그들은 언덕으로 총총걸음으로 가서 이 화창한 날에 저녁 무렵까지 머물렀다. 
몸이 탱탱해질 때까지 나무열매들을 먹고 또 먹다보니 그렇지 않아도 안하무인인 성격들인데 자신들의 두 발로는 집으로 돌아가고 싶지 않아, 수탉이 나무열매 껍질들로 조그만 한 마차를 하나 만들었다. 
마차가 준비되자, 귀여운 암탉이 마차에 자리를 자고 앉으며 수탉에게 말했다. 
“자자 어서 마차를 끌어봐.”
“얼씨구!”라며 수탉이 말했다. “내가 끄느니 차라리 걸어서 집에 가겠다. 그러니 꿈 깨. 마부(마차를 조종하는 사람)가 될 마음도 없는데 나보고 직접 마차를 끌라니 참내 원.”
그렇게 두 건달이 옥신각신하고 있는데, 오리(여자건달)가 그들에게 꽥꽥거리며 이렇게 말했다.
“이 날강도들아, 어디 감히 내 나무열매 언덕에 올라와? 어디, 내 부리(주먹) 맛 좀 봐라!”
그러면서 부리(입)을 쩍 벌리며 수탉에게 달려들었다. 
하지만 수탉은 싸움이라면 일가견이 있는 건달이었던지라 한 방에 오리를 때려눕혔다. 
결국 수탉의 며느리발톱(새의 발톱)에 상처를 너무 입은 오리는 싹싹 빌며 벌로 자신이 기꺼이 그들의 마차를 끌겠다고 나섰다. 
귀여운 수탉이 의자에 앉아 마부가 되었다.
그 후 즉시 그들은 폭발적인 스피드로 출발했다.
“오리, 전속력으로.”라는 말과 함께.
그들은 길을 가던 도중 두 나그네들을 만났다. 
핀(건달. “옷에 ‘핀’을 꽂았다”라고 말할 때의 핀)과 바늘(바느질 할 때 사용하는 바늘)이 그들이었다. 물론 둘 다 건달들이었다. 
그들이 외쳤다. 
“멈춰! 멈추라고!”
그들의 말인즉슨 날도 곧 칠흑같이 어두워질 거 같고 더 걸어갈 수도 있을 거 같지 않고 도로도 너무 진창(흙투성이)이니 잠깐만 그 마차에 타고갈수 있게 해줄 수 없느냐는 것이었다. 
그들(건달)은 성문 옆에 있는 재단사의 집에 들렀다가 오는 길에 그만 맥주 집에서 한 잔씩을 하는 바람에 시간을 지체하게 되었다는 것이었다. 
게다가 자신들은 홀쭉한 ‘족속’(사람)들이니 공간도 많이 차지하지 않을 거라고 했다.
그래서 수탉(남자건달)이 그들 둘 다 타는 걸 허락했다. 
다만 그들은 수탉(남자건달)과 수탉의 사랑스런 암탉(여자건달)의 발을 찌르지 않겠다는 다짐을 하고서야 마차에 오를 수 있었다. 
저녁 늦게야 그들(건달들)은 주막에 들어갔다. 
밤에 더 가기 싫었고, 무엇보다 오리(여자건달)의 두 다리가 강하지 못해 다리 한 쪽이 다른 쪽 다리로 넘어지려는 찰나에 때마침 주막이 보여 묵고 가기로 한 것이다.
주막 주인은 처음엔 완강히 거부했다. 
“다 찼다.”
왜냐면 주막 주인 눈에 그들(건달들)이 썩 눈에 들어오지 않았기 때문이다.
하지만 건달들이 워낙에 말로 기분 좋게 주막 주인을 구슬리고, 사랑스런 암탉(여자건달)이 오는 도중에 낳은 계란을 주기로 하고, 또한 오리도 주기로 하고, 딱 하루 밤만 묵고 가겠다고 하고서야, 마침내 주막 주인도 그들을 받아들였다. 
자 이제 그들(건달들)은 밤새 잘 먹고 마시며 그나한 술자리를 가졌다. 
아침 일찍 날이 밝아올 무렵 그러니까 모두가 아직 잠들어 있을 때, 수탉(남자건달)이 암탉(여자건달)을 깨우더니 어제 그 계란을 가져와 부리로 쪼아 깬 다음 함께 나누어먹곤 계란껍질들을 난로 위에 던졌다.  
그런 다음 여전히 자고 있는 바늘(건달)한테로 바늘의 머리를 쥐고 이리로 가져와 주막 주인이 쓰는 의자 쿠션 속에 꽂아놓았다.
그런 다음 핀(“옷에 ‘핀’을 꽂다”라고 말 할 때의 핀)을 주막 주인이 사용하는 타월(수건)에 넣어두었다.
그런 다음 그들(수탉과 암탉)은 간다 온다 한 마디 말도 없이 들판으로 줄행랑을 쳐버렸다.
집 밖에서 자길 좋아하는 오리(여자건달)는 그 시각에 안마당에 머물러 있다 그들(수탉과 암탉)이 줄행랑을 치는 소리를 듣곤, 가뿐하게 놀고 싶단 생각에 개울을 찾아내 아래쪽으로 수영을 했다. 역시 오리는 물에서 수영하는 게 마차를 끄는 것보단 훨씬 더 빠른 이동수간이었다(줄행랑을 쳤다는 얘기).
한편 수탉과 암탉 그리고 오리가 줄행랑을 친 2시간 후에 주막 주인이 침대에서 일어나 세수를 하고나서 수건으로 얼굴을 닦으려다 그만 수건에 꽂혀 있던 핀에 이쪽 귀 있는 데에서부터 반대쪽 귀 있는 데까지 붉은 줄을 긋고 말았다.  
이후 부엌으로 들어간 주막주인이 담○파이프에 불을 붙이려는데, 아침 일찍 수탉이 난로 위에 버리고 간 계란껍질이 때마침 주막주인의 눈 속으로 화살처럼 튀었어요.
“오늘 아침은 모든 게 날 공격하는 군.”라며 주막주인(남자)이 툴툴대면서 ‘할아버지 의자’(의자 꼭대기가 위로 쑥 돌출되어 있는 의자종류이름. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/UxapZt )에 앉다말고 “으악!”하고 비명을 지르며 일어나고 말았어요. 
주막주인이 소리쳤어요. 
“정말 돌아버리겠네!” 
왜냐하면 얼굴에 상처를 입힌 핀이 줬던 고통은 방금 바늘에 입은 상처에 비하면 아무 것도 아니었기 때문이죠.
주막주인은 화가 머리끝까지 났어요.
그리고 어제 밤늦게 주막에 들어왔던 손님들을 의심하기에 이르렀죠.
그래서 샅샅이 주막을 뒤졌지만 그들의 모습은 그 어디에도 없었어요.
주막주인은 맹세했어요. 
“앞으론 절대 놈팽이들을 단 한 명도 받지 않겠다.”
왜냐하면 그들은 많이 소비하지만 단 한 푼도 지불을 하지 않거니와 베풀어준 은덕에 대해 못된 장난으로 도리어 앙갚음을 하기 때문이죠.

(끝)

동화 「건달들의 무리」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「건달들의 무리」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter10.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



11. 가엾은 오빠와 사랑스러운 누이



가엾은 오빠가 사랑스러운 누이의 손을 꼭 잡으며 말했어요.
“엄마(친엄마)가 돌아가신 이후론 모든 게 행복하지 않아. 새엄마는 매일 같이 우리에게 매질을 하고, 옆에라도 가려 치면 발길질을 하지. 우리 식사는 먹다 남긴 딱딱한 빵 껍질들이 다야. 차라리 식탁 아래 있는 강아지가 더 잘 먹을 걸. 왜냐면 새엄마가 종종 맛난 것을 던져주니까. 하느님도 우린 불쌍하게 여기실 거야. 엄마만 살아계셨어도! 자, 우리 이렇게 살 바엔 차라리 넓은 세상으로 나가보자.”
오누이는 하루 종일 풀밭, 들판, 돌투성이 장소들을 걸었어요, 
비가 부슬부슬 내리자 사랑스러운 누이가 말했어요.
“하늘이랑 우리 마음이 같이 울고 있어.”
저녁이 될 무렵 오누이는 울창한 숲에 다다랐어요. 
너무 피곤하고 배고픈 상태에서 처량하게 오래 걸은 거라, 오누이는 그냥 속이 빈 나무속에 누워 그대로 잠이 들어버렸어요.
다음날 오누이가 눈을 떠보니 해는 이미 벌써 하늘 높이 떠서 햇볕 쨍쨍 나무 안까지 따사롭게 비추고 있었어요.
그때 오빠가 말했어요.
“누이야, 나 목말라. 작은 시냇물이라도 어디 있는지를 알면 당장 달려가 한 모금 마실 텐데. 어 물 소리가 들려.”
오빠가 자리에서 일어나 누이의 손을 잡아 시냇물을 찾아 나섰어요.
하지만 사악한 새엄마는 사실 마녀였어요.
그래서 두 아이가 어디로 가나 보려고 몰래 살금살금 뒤를 밟았었죠.
마녀들은 살금살금 기어 다니며 숲에 있는 시냇물엔 모두 마법을 거는데 그녀도 그리 했어요.
오누이가 때마침 돌멩이들 사이로 맑은 물을 내뿜고 있는 자그마한 시냇물 하나를 발견하고서 오빠가 막 한 모금 마시려는 찰나에, 하지만 누이(여동생)는 시냇물이 흐르며 말하는 소리를 들었어요.
“나를 마시는 사람은 호랑이가 된다. 나를 마시는 사람은 호랑이가 된다.”
그래서 누이는 깜짝 놀라 외쳤어요.
“제발, 오빠, 마시지마, 그걸 마시면 오빤 사나운 짐승이 돼서 나를 갈기 찢어놓을 거야.”
오빠는 마시지 않았어요. 하지만 목이 너무 타 이렇게 말했어요.
“다른 샘물을 찾을 때까지 참을게.”
다음 시냇물에 도착했을 때도 시냇물이 이렇게 말하는 것을 누이가 들었어요.
“나를 마시는 자는 늑대가 된다. 나를 마시는 자는 늑대가 된다.”
그러자 누이가 깜짝 놀라 외쳤어요.
“제발, 오빠, 마시지마, 그걸 마시면 늑대로 변해서 나를 잡아먹게 될 거야.” 
오빠는 마시지 않고 말했어요.
“다음 샘물이 나올 때까지 참도록 할게, 하지만 너무 지금 목이 너무 말라 다음 샘물이 나올 땐 네가 뭐라 하든 마셔야겠어.”
오누이가 세 번째 시냇물에 도착했을 때도 누이는 시냇물이 흐르며 말하는 소리를 들었어요.
“나를 마시면 노루로 변한다. 나를 마시면 노루로 변한다.”
여도앵이 말했어요.
“오, 제발 기도할게, 오빠, 마시지마, 그걸 마시면 노루로 변해서 내게서 달아날 거야.”
하지만 오빠는 즉시 시냇물 가에 무릎을 꿇고 앉아 허리를 굽혀 상당한 양의 물을 마셨어요.
그리고 오빠의 두 입술이 그 시냇물에 닿자마자 오빠는 온데 간데 없고 새끼 노루 한 마리가 거기 누워 있었어요. 
그래서 지금 누이는 마법에 걸려버린 가엾은 오빠를 생각하며 울었어요.
새끼 노루도 울며 누이 옆에 구슬프게 앉아 있었어요.
하지만 마침내 소녀가 말했어요.
“뚝, 사랑하는 새기 노루야, 나는 너를 절대 떠나보내지 않을 거야.”
그런 다음 소녀는 자신의 소중한 바지멜빵을 풀어 새끼 노루의 목을 감싼 다음 ‘골풀 줄기’(골풀은, 녹색의 줄기가 많이 나 있는 식물이름. 골풀 사진 링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/cIgeKG )들을 뜯어내 보드라운 끈으로 엮었어요.
그 끈으로 소녀는 새끼 노루를 묶고 앞장섰어요.
소녀는 숲속으로 더 깊숙이 깊숙이 들어갔답니다.
오누이가 그렇게 아주 오래 걸어 들어가자 마침내 자그마한 집 한 채가 나타났어요.
안을 들여다본 소녀는 텅빈 것을 확인하곤 생각했어요.
“여기 머물며 살면 되겠다.”
그런 다음 소녀는 이파리들과 이끼들을 구해와 새끼 노루를 위한 보드라운 잠자리를 만들어주었어요.
매일 아침 소녀는 밖으로 나가 나무뿌리와 산딸기와 나무열매들을 주어와 배를 채우고, 연한 잔디를 따서 새끼 노루에게 먹였어요.
소녀가 손으로 주는 잔디를 먹으면 새끼 노루는 기분이 좋아 소녀 주위를 폴짝폴짝 뛰어다녔어요.
저녁이 되어 잠이 오면 누이는 하느님께 기도를 드리고 새끼 노루의 등에 머리를 베고 누웠어요.
네, 새끼 노루의 등은 그녀의 베게였답니다.
그 위에 머리를 베고 누우면 잠이 잘 왔어요.
(원문에 있는 소녀의 생각임→) ‘아, 오빠가 인간의 모습으로만 다시 돌아온다면 더할 나위 없는 삶일 텐데.’
잠시 그렇게 오누이 혼자서만 이 황량함(숲) 속에 살았어요.
하지만 하루는 국왕전하께서 숲으로 대규모 사냥을 나오셨어요.
그래서 뿔피리소리가 울리고 개들이 짖고 사냥꾼들의 흥겨운 고함소리들이 숲 전체로 전해졌어요.
새끼 노루가 그 소리를 듣곤 나가보고 싶어 안달이 났어요.
“오,”라며 새끼 노루가 누이에게 말했어요. “나를 사냥터에 내보내죠. 너무너무 보고 싶어 견딜 수가 없어.”
새끼 노루가 너무도 애걸복걸했기에 누이로서도 결국 승낙할 수 밖에 없었어요.
“하지만,”이라며 소녀는 새끼 노루에게 말했어요. “저녁엔 나한테로 돌아와야 해. 험상궂은 사냥꾼들이 무서워 난 문을 닫고 있어야하니, 돌아올 땐 노크를 하며 이렇게 말하려무나, ‘사랑하는 누이야, 나를 들여보내줘!’라고. 그럼 네가 우리 오빠란 걸 알 수 있으니까. 하지만 그리 말하지 않음 난 문을 열어주지 않을 거야.”
그런 다음 새끼 노루는 후다닥 뛰어갔어요. 탁 터인 공간으로 나오니 너무도 행복하고 흥겨웠던 거지요.
왕과 사냥꾼들은 아름다운 동물을 보고 뒤쫓았어요, 하지만 아무도 새끼노루를 따라잡을 수 없었어요.
거의 다 잡았다 싶으면 새끼 노루가 수풀 속으로 후다닥 달아나며 모습을 감추어버렸기 때문이죠.
날이 짙어지자 새끼 노루가 오두막으로 달려와 똑똑 노크를 하며 말했어요.
“사랑하는 누이야, 나를 들여보내줘.”
그러자 문이 열렸고 새끼 노루가 깡충 뛰어 들어가 자신의 보드라운 잠자리에 기대 밤새 잠을 잤어요.
다음날 사냥이 다시 시작되자, 새끼 노루가 다시 뿔나팔 소리와 호! 호! 라고 외치는 사냥꾼들의 소리를 듣곤 가만있질 못하며 결국 또 이렇게 말했어요.
“뉴이야, 나를 내보내줘, 가봐야 되겠어.”
누이는 새끼 노루를 위해 문을 열어주며 단단히 일러주었어요.
“알겠지, 저녁엔 다시 여기로 돌아와야 하고 꼭 암호를 말하는 거 잊으면 안 돼.”
왕과 그의 사냥꾼들은 바지멜빵이 목에 매달려 있는 이 새끼 노루를 다시 발견하곤 모두 뒤를 쫓았어요.
하지만 새끼 노루는 그들에 비해 워낙에 재빠르고 민첩했어요.
이렇게 추격과 탈출이 종일 계속되었고, 마침내 저녁이 되어 사냥꾼들이 새끼 노루를 포위하는데 까진 성공했어요.
사냥꾼들 중 한 명이 새끼 노루의 앞발에 살짝 상처를 입혔는데 이 바람에 새끼 노루는 발을 절뚝거리며 느리게 뛰었어요.
그래서 사냥꾼 한 명이 새끼 노루의 뒤를 살금살금 쫓아 오두막까지 갔다 새끼 노루가 “사랑하는 누이야, 나를 들여보내줘.”라고 말하는 소리와 동시에 문이 열리며 새끼 노루를 들여보내주곤 다시 닫히는 모습을 보았어요.
그 사냥꾼은 이 모든 상황을 눈여겨보아둔 다음 왕에게로 돌아와 지금까지 보고 들은 것들을 말해주었어요.
그러자 왕이 말했어요.
“내일 한 번 더 사냥을 나가보자.” 
하지만 어린 누이는 새끼 노루가 다친 것을 보곤 기겁을 하고 말았어요.
누이는 상처를 씻어준 다음 약용 풀잎을 바라주며 말했어요.
“자렴, 사랑하는 새끼 노루야, 금방 다시 좋아질 거야.”
하지만 상처가 가벼웠기 때문에 다음날 아침이 되자 새끼 노루는 완전히 건강을 되찾았어요.
밖에서 사냥이 다시 시작된 소리가 들리자 새끼 노루가 말했어요.
“아 못 참겠어, 나 가 볼래. 이번엔 저들이 나를 쉽게 찾지 못하게 할게.”
누이가 화들짝 놀라 말했어요.
“저들이 이번엔 널 죽일 거야, 그럼 이 큰 숲에 나만 남게 되, 이 세상에 나만 남게 되는 거라고. 난 널 절대 내보내줄 수 없어.”
“여기 있다간 안달이 나서 죽을 거야.”라며 새끼 노루가 대답했어요. “뿔나팔 소리에 너무 즐거워 소름이 끼친다고.”
그래서 누이는 하는 수 없이 무거운 마음으로 문을 다시 열어주었고, 새끼 노루는 긴장감과 흥겨움에 취해 숲으로 깡충깡충 뛰며 사라졌어요.
새끼 노루를 본 왕이 자신의 사냥꾼들에게 일렀어요.
“밤이 될 때까지 종일 뒤쫓기만 해라 절대 저 동물에게 상처를 내지 않도록 조심해라.”
날(해)이 저물자, 왕이 그 사냥꾼에게 말했어요.
“자 이제 나를 숲 속에 있다는 그 오두막으로 안내하거라.”
사냥꾼은 문 앞에 도착한 다음 똑똑 노크를 하고서 소리쳤어요.
“사랑하는 누이야, 나를 들여보내줘.”
그러자 문이 열리고, 왕이 성큼 걸어 들어가 보았어요, 그런데 거기엔 왕이 지금까지 본 어떤 다른 여인들보다도 아름다운 처녀가 한 명 서 있었어요.
새끼 노루가 아니라 웬 남자가 머리에 황금 왕관을 쓰고서 들어오는 걸 본 처녀는 깜짝 놀랐어요. 
하지만 왕은 그녀를 상냥하게 바라보며 손을 내밀며 말했어요.
“나와 함께 내 궁전으로 가서 아내가 되어주지 않으시겠소?”
“네, 기꺼이요.”라고 그 처녀가 대답했어요. “하지만 새끼 노루도 저와 동행하게 해주세요, 전 그 애만 남겨놓고 갈 순 없어요.”
왕이 말했어요.
“당신이 살아있는 한 당신 곁에 머물며 어떤 부족함 없이 지낼 수 있게 해주리다,”
바로 그때 새끼 노루가 깡충 뛰어서 집안으로 들어왔어요.
누이는 ‘골풀 줄기’(골풀은, 녹색의 줄기가 많이 나 있는 식물이름. 골풀 사진 링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/cIgeKG )로 새끼 노루를 다시 묶은 다음 손에 꼭 쥐고서 왕과 함께 그 오두막을 떠났어요.
왕은 사랑스런 그 처녀를 자신의 말에 태우고 궁전으로 데려가 결혼식을 웅장하게 올려주었어요.
처녀는 이제 왕비가 되어 함께 오랫동안 행복한 나날들을 보냈어요.
새끼 노루도 잘 돌보아졌고요 귀여움을 듬뿍 받으며 궁전 정원 안을 이리저리 막 뛰어다니며 놀았어요.
한편 사악한 새엄마(오누이의 새엄마)는 오누이가 세상으로 나간 후, 분명 누이는 숲에 사는 사나운 짐승들에게 갈기갈기 물려죽을 테고, 새끼 노루로 변한 오빠는 어느 사냥꾼이 쏜 총에 맞아죽었을 거라 생각하고 있었어요.
그런데 이런 오누이가 아주 행복하게 살고 있다는 거예요, 그것도 아주 유복하게요.
질투심과 증오가 마음속에서부터 끓어올라 새엄마는 한시도 가만히 있을 수가 없었어요.
“어떻게 하면 고것들을 다시 불행의 늪으로 떨어뜨린담.”
새엄마에게는 암흑처럼 추한 딸이 하나 있었는데 그녀는 눈이 하나 뿐이었어요.
딸이 엄마에게 투덜대며 말했어요.
“왕비라니! 어 왕비라니! 왕비가 될 거라면 내가 되어야하는 거 아니었어.”
“얘야 가만히 좀 있거라.”라며 노파가 대답했어요. 그런 다음 구슬리는 말로 이렇게 말했어요. “기회를 봐서 내가 어떻게 해보마.”
시간이 흘러 왕비가 예쁜 남자아이를 낳았어요.
때마침 왕이 사냥을 가고 없었던지라, 마녀(오누이의 새엄마는 원래 마녀였음)가 시녀 복장을 하고서 왕비가 누워 있는 방으로 들어와 이렇게 말했어요.
“자, 목욕물이 준비되었습니다. 목욕은 몸에도 좋고 새로운 활력을 북돋아줄 겁니다. 물이 식기 전에 어서 서두르세요.”
딸(마녀의 딸)도 또한 옆에 있었어요.
그렇게 그들(마녀와 딸)은 허약한 왕비를 목욕탕으로 데리고 가 욕조 안에 넣은 후 문을 닫고 도망쳐버렸어요.
그들(마녀와 딸)이 목욕탕에 있는 난로를 미친 듯 후끈하게 만들어놓았기 때문에 아름다운 젊은 왕비는 결국 숨이 막혀 죽고 말았어요. 
이 일이 마무리되자, 마녀는 자신의 딸에게 ‘나이트캡’(잠잘 때 쓰는 모자)을 씌우고 왕비 대신 침대에 누워있게 했어요.
마녀는 딸에게 왕비의 몸매와 얼굴을 주었지만 딱 한 가지 원래부터 없던 한 쪽 눈을 줄 수는 없었어요.
하지만 그쪽 얼굴을 왕이 못 보게 돌아누워 있음 되는 거였어요.
저녁에 왕이 궁전으로 돌아왔다가 왕비가 아들을 출산했다는 말을 듣고 진심 기뻐 사랑하는 아내의 상태가 어떤지 보려고 침대로 가려는데, 노파(마녀)가 재빨리 말하기를, “산모의 건강을 위해 커튼을 쳐놓았습니다. 왕비님은 아직 빛을 접하시면 안 됩니다. 절대 휴식이 필요해요.”라고 하였다. 
왕이 자리를 떴기 때문에 침대에 누워 있는 게 가짜 왕비란 사실이 들통나지 않았다.  
하지만 모두가 잠이 든 한밤중에, 깨어있던 유일한 사람인 유모가 아이 방 요람(아기침대) 옆에 앉아 있는데, 문이 열리며 진짜 왕비가 걸어 들어오는 것이다. 
진짜 왕비는 요람에서 아이를 꺼내더니 품에 안고 젖을 먹였다. 
그런 다음 요람의 머리받침대를 흔들어 모양을 바로잡고는 아이를 도로 눕히곤 사랑스런 ‘누비이불’(천을 반으로 포개고 안에 솜을 넣고 줄이 지게 받은 이불. 이불광고 이미지 링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/J4nRo8 )로 덮어주었다. 
진짜 왕비는 새끼 노루도 잊지 않았다. 새끼 노루가 누워 있는 구석으로 가 노루의 등을 토닥토닥 해주었다. 
그런 다음 진짜 왕비는 조용히 도로 문 밖으로 나갔다. 
다음날 아침 유모는 성문보초병들에게 “밤에 궁전에 들어온 사람이 있는가?”라고 물어보았지만 그들의 대답은 “아뇨, 아무도 들어가는 걸 못 봤는데요.”였다. 
진짜 왕비는 이런 식으로 많은 밤에 왔지만 단 한 마디도 하지 않았다. 
유모가 항상 그녀를 지켜보았지만 용기가 안나 감히 누구에게도 이 사실을 발설하지 않았다. 
한동안 이런 식이었는데 어느 날 밤에 진짜 왕비가 말을 하기 시작했다. 
진짜 왕비가 말했다. 
“어떻게 지냈니 내 아가야, 별 일 없지 내 새끼 노루야? 앞으로 두 번만 더 오고, 다신 안 와야지.”
유모는 어떻게 해야 할 줄을 몰라, 진짜 왕비가 다시 가버린 후, 왕께 가 모든 사실을 아뢰었어요.
왕이 말했어요.
“오, 맙소사! 이게 도대체 뭔 일이지? 내일 밤엔 내가 아이 곁에 있겠다.”
왕은 저녁에 아기 방으로 갔어요.
그리고 한밤중이 되자 진짜 왕비가 나타나 말했어요….
“어떻게 지냈니 내 아가야, 별 일 없지 내 새끼 노루야? 앞으로 한 번만 더 오고, 다신 안 와야지.”
진짜 왕비는 죽기 전에 자신이 하던 대로 아기를 돌보아주었어요.
워낙 당혹스러워 왕도 차마 그녀에게 말을 붙이지 못했어요, 하지만 왕은 다음날 밤에도 다시 그 자리를 지켰어요.
그러자 진짜 왕비가 나타나 말했어요….
“어떻게 지냈니 내 아가야, 별 일 없지 내 새끼 노루야? 이번만 오고, 다신 안 와야지.”
그리되자 왕도 가만히 있을 수 없어 진짜 왕비에게로 튀어나오며 말했어요.
“당신은 분명 내 사랑스런 아내가 아니오.”
그녀가 대답했어요.
“네, 저는 당신의 사랑스런 아내입니다.”
그와 동시에 그녀가 다시 생명을 얻었어요.
하느님의 은총으로 장미꽃처럼 싱싱하고 건강한 몸으로 다시 살아난 거랍니다.
그런 다음 왕비는 왕에게, 사악한 마녀와 그녀의 딸이 자신(=진짜 왕비)에게 저지른 끔찍한 만행을 고해 받쳤어요.
왕은 둘(‘마녀’와 ‘마녀의 딸’)을 판사 앞으로 끌고 가게 해 재판을 받게 했어요.
마녀의 딸은 숲에 ‘유치되어’(=갇혀) 사나운 짐승들에게 갈기갈기 찢겨죽었고요, 마녀는 불 속에 던져져 끔찍하게 태워졌어요.
마녀가 완전히 불에 타버리자, 새끼 노루(왕비의 오빠)도 형태가 바뀌며 다시 원래의 사람모습으로 돌아왔어요.  
그리하여 누이(여동생)와 오빠는 둘 다 평생 함께 행복하게 살았답니다.

(끝)

동화 「가엾은 오빠와 사랑스러운 누이」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「가엾은 오빠와 사랑스러운 누이」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter11.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



12. 라푼첼



■ 미리알림

유명한 동화의 원작을 접한다는 마음으로 가볍게 접근하시면 좋을 거 같아요. :)
 
(분문 시작)

라푼첼

일찍이 아이를 가지는데 오랫동안 실패해온 부부가 있었어요.
그러다 마침내 아내의 소원대로 신령님께서 아이를 점지해주셨답니다. 
이들 부부의 집 뒤로는 훌륭한 뜰이 있었는데요, 무척이나 아름다운 꽃들과 약초들로 가득한 곳이었어요.
뜰은 높다란 담들로 둘러싸여 있어 누구도 들어갈 수 없었어요.
여자마법사의 소유였거든요.
무서운 마법의 소유자라 모두가 무서워하는 여자마법사 말이에요.
하루는 아내가 창문으로 여자마법사의 뜰을 내려다 보다가 무척이나 아름다운 상추(=라푼첼. 위키백과에는 ‘라푼첼’이 ‘독일양배추’라네요. 하지만 뚱둥한 양배추란 미녀인 여주인공이 연결이 안 돼서 상추로 바꾸어 해석했습니다. 라푼첼 사진 링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/4gW9wK )가 심어져 있는 공간을 보게 되었던 거죠.
상추가 너무도 싱싱하고 초록색이라 정말 먹어보고 싶은 마음이 간절했어요.
그 바람은 나날이 심해져 가는데 구할 방법은 없다보니 시름시름 앓다 급기야 핼쑥해진 얼굴이 말이 아니었어요.
걱정이 된 남편이 물었어요.
“왜 그래, 여보?”
“아,”라며 아내가 대꾸했어요. “죽을 때 죽더라도 집 뒤 뜰에 있는 상추 한 포기만 먹어봤으면.”
아내를 사랑하던 남편이 생각했어요. 
“아내가 이렇게 먹고 싶어 하는데, 무슨 옥고를 치르더라도 상추를 몇 포기 구해와야겠어.”
저녁 해질 무렵에 남편은 벽을 타고 내려가 여자마법사의 뜰로 잠입해서 허겁지겁 상추 한 포기를 캐서 아내에게 갖다 주었어요.
아내는 즉시 그걸로 샐러드 해서 아주 맛나게 먹었답니다. 
그런데 아뿔싸 다음날이 되자… 이번엔 전날보다 세 배 더 상추가 먹고 싶은 거예요.
그래서 몇 포기라도 더 캐오기 위해 남편이 한 번 더 뜰로 담을 타고 내려갔어요.
저녁 무렵의 어둑어둑함이 묻어있는 가운데 남편이 내려가 상추를 캐고 벽을 타고 오르려는데 그만 깜짝 놀랐지 뭐예요.
여자마법사가 자기 앞에 서 있었기 때문이죠.
“어디서 감히,”라며 여자마법사가 아주 화가 난 얼굴로 말을 했어요. “내 뜰로 내려와 도둑처럼 내 상추를 훔칠 생각을 할 수 있지? 본때를 좀 보여줘야겠군!”
“아아,”라며 남편이 말했어요. “제발 제게 자비를 베풀어주십시오, 꼭 필요해서 어쩔 수가 없었어요. 제 아내가 창문으로 이 상추를 보고 죽기 전에 먹어보면 소원이 없겠다고 해서요.”
그 말에 여자마법사의 노여움이 좀 가셨어요, 그래서 그에게 말했어요.
“그렇다면야, 네가 원하는 만큼 상추를 따서 갈 수 있게 허락해주겠다. 하지만 조건이 하나 있다, 네 아내가 장차 나을 그 아이를 내게 주어야겠다. 난 그 아이를 해치려는 게 아니라 엄마처럼 돌볼 생각이거든.”
공포에 잡혀 있던 그 남자는 앞뒤 가리지 않고 동의하고 말았어요.
여자 아이가 태어났어요. 그와 동시에 여자마법사가 오더니 아이에게 ‘라푼첼’(상추. 독일양배추. 라푼첼 사진 링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/4gW9wK )이라는 이름을 지어주고는 아이를 데리고 가버렸어요.
라푼첼은 하늘 아래 가장 예쁜 여자아이로 자랐어요.
그녀가 12살이 되자, 여자마법사가 숲 속 탑에 가두었어요. 나오는 계단도 문도 없는 탑이었어요.
맨 꼭대기에 작은 창이 하나 나 있었어요.
여자마법사는 탑에 들어오고 싶을 때면, 창 아래로 가 외쳤어요.
“라푼첼아, 라푼첼아, 네 머리카락을 아래로 내려다오.”
라푼첼은 금실 같이 훌륭하고 엄청나게 기다란 머리카락을 가지고 있었거든요.
그래서 여자마법사의 목소리가 들리면, 땋았던 머리카락을 풀어 창문 고리들 중 하나에 감고서 20미터 아래까지 머리카락을 늘어뜨리면 여자마법사가 그걸 잡고서 올라왔어요. 
일 이 년 후, 왕자님이 말을 타고 숲에 들어오셨다 그 탑을 지나가게 되었어요.
그런데 어디서 매우 아름다운 노랫소리가 들려 왕자님은 멈춰 서서 듣고 있었답니다.
그 목소리는 라푼첼의 목소리였어요. 그녀는 사랑스러운 목소리를 가졌는데 심심할 때면 고독함을 달래기 위해 노래를 불렀답니다. 
왕자님은 그녀가 있는 곳까지 올라가고 싶어서 탑의 문을 찾아보았지만 그 어디에도 출입구는 없었어요.
그래서 일단 돌아갔는데 어쨌든 이번 일로 왕자님은 그녀의 노랫소리에 큰 감명을 받았답니다.
이후 왕자님은 매일 숲으로 와서 그녀의 노랫소리를 들었어요.
그러다 한 번은 나무 아래에 서 있는데, 여자마법사가 거리로 오지 뭐예요. 
곧 그 여자마법사가 어찌어찌 소리치는 게 들렸어요.
“라푼첼아, 라푼첼아, 네 머리카락을 아래로 내려주렴.”
라푼첼이 자신의 땋은 머리를 내려주자 여자마법사가 그걸 잡고 탑으로 올라갔어요.
“그녀의 머리카락이 사다리 역할을 하는 거라면, 나도 한번 운을 시험해보리라.”라고 왕자님은 말했어요.
다음날 어둠이 깔리기 시작할 무렵에 왕자님은 탑으로 가 소리쳤어요.
“라푼첼아, 라푼첼아, 네 머리카락을 아래로 내려주렴.”
그 즉시 머리카락이 내려와 왕자님은 부여잡고 올라갔어요.
한 번도 본 적이 없는 웬 남자가 들어오는 것을 보고 라푼첼도 처음엔 깜짝 놀랐어요.
하지만 왕자님이 친구처럼 차분히 말씀을 걸기 시작하시는 거예요.
“당신이 내 마음을 온통 휘저어놓은 이후 내게 안식이란 없었소. 당신을 보지 않곤 못 버티겠지 뭐요.”
그 말에 라푼첼도 두려움을 누그러뜨렸어요.
“저를 당신의 남편으로 받아들여줄 수 있겠소?”
그제야 라푼첼의 눈에 이분이 젊고 잘생긴 게 보였어요.
라푼첼이 생각했어요.
“마녀 엄마보다 이 분이 더 나를 사랑해주실 거야.”
그래서 그녀는 그에게 “네”라고 말하곤 자신의 손을 왕자님의 손에 안겼어요.
라푼첼이 말했어요.
“기꺼이 당신을 따라 갈래요, 하지만 저는 여기서 내려가는 방법을 모르는 걸요. 매일 제게 비단 한 타래(뭉쳐놓은 거)씩 가져다주시면, 제가 그걸로 사다리를 짜 볼게요. 그럼 준비 되는 대로 게가 내려가고, 저를 말 등에 태우고 가 주세요.”
그들은 왕자님이 매일 저녁 들르기로 말을 맞추었어요. 왜냐면 늙은 여자마법사가 낮에 오기 때문이죠.
여자마법사 또한 이 사실을 모르고 있었어요.
그러다 한 번은 라푼첼이 이렇게 말하는 거에요.
“알고 싶어요, 나이 많으신 엄마, 어째서 왕자님을 들어 올리는 것보다 당신을 들어 올리는 것이 훨씬 더 무겁죠…. 왕자님은 얼마 있지도 않는데.”
“뭐! 이 고약한 것,”라며 여자마법사가 소리쳤어요. “뭐가 어쩌고 어째! 너를 세상과 완전히 단절시켰는데도 이렇게 나를 속여.”
화가 난 여자마법사가 라푼첼의 아름다운 머리채를 부여잡곤 자신의 왼손에 두 번 감은 다음 오른손에 가위를 들고서 “싹둑!” 또 “싹둑!” 자르고 말았어요.
그래서 그녀의 사랑스럽던 머리카락들이 바닥에 뚝뚝 떨어졌어요.
그럼에도 불구하고 여전히 화가 안 풀린 이 무자비한 여자마법사는 불쌍한 라푼첼을 ‘황무지’(사람의 손이 가지 않은 거칠고 쓸모없는 땅)에 가둬버렸어요.
거기서 라푼첼은 큰 슬픔과 고통 속에 살아야했답니다.
하지만, 라푼첼을 내쫓아 가둔 바로 그 날 저녁 여자마법사는 라푼첼의 머리카락을 창의 고리에 다시 이었어요.
곧 왕자님이 나타나 소리쳤어요.
“라푼첼아, 라푼첼아, 네 머리카락을 아래로 내려주렴.”
여자마법사가 창에 매단 그 머리카락을 내려주었어요.
왕자님이 올라왔어요. 하지만 아리따운 라푼첼은 온데간데없고 웬 여자마법사가 사악하고 이글이글거리는 눈빛으로 자신을 노려보고 있지 뭐예요.
“아하!”라며 여자마법사가 조롱하듯 큰소리로 말했어요. “연인을 찾고 있군, 하지만 아름다운 새는 더는 둥지에서 노래 부르고 있지 않지. 고양이가 낚아채갔거든. 그리고 그 고양이가 이제 또한 네 놈의 눈을 할퀼 참이다. 라푼첼은 네게서 사라졌다. 너는 이제 다신 그녀를 볼 수 없을 게다.”
왕자님은 상심에 그만 제 정신을 잃고 절망감에 그만 탑에서 뛰어내리고 말았어요.
다행히 죽지는 않았지만 떨어질 때 가시나무에 떨어지는 바람에 두 눈을 가시에 찔리고 말았어요.
이후 왕자님은 눈이 먼 상태에서 숲을 방황했어요. 그렇게 왕자님은 뿌리와 열매 외엔 아무 것도 먹지 못했답니다. 그리고 사랑하는 아내를 잃은 것이 너무도 슬퍼 하염없는 눈물말 흘리셨어요.
그렇게 수년간을 비탄에 잠겨 떠돌아다니시다 마침내 라푼첼이 살고 있는 ‘황무지’(사람의 손이 가지 않은 거칠고 쓸모없는 땅)에까지 다다르게 되셨어요.
그 황무지는 라푼첼이 쌍둥이 남매(오빠와 여동생)를 낳고 가엾게 살고 있던 곳이었어요.
왕자님은 너무도 친숙한 라푼첼의 목소리가 들리자 앞으로 나아갔어요.
왕자님이 다가오자마자 라푼첼은 그를 알아보고 목을 감사며 안겨서 울었어요.
그때 라푼첼의 눈물 두 방울이 왕자님의 눈들을 젖셨어요. 
그러자 왕자님의 시력이 점점 밝아지며 급기야 예전처럼 라푼첼을 볼 수 있게 되었어요.
왕자님은 라푼첼을 데리고 자신의 왕국으로 돌아갔어요.
왕국에서도 왕자님 일행을 대환영해주었어요.
이후 그들은 행복해하고 만족해하며 오래토록 잘 살았답니다. (해피엔딩 :) ㅎㅎ) 

(끝)

동화 「라푼첼」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「라푼첼」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter12.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



13. 숲 속의 세 난쟁이



옛날에 아내가 죽은 남자와 남편이 죽은 여자가 살았어요.
남자에겐 딸(주인공)이 한 명 있었고요, 여자에게도 또한 딸이 한 명 있었어요.
소녀들을 서로 알고 지냈어요, 같이 산보도 나갔다 여자의 집에 들러곤 했지요.
그때 여자가 남자의 딸에게 말했어요.
“들어봐, 네 아빠에게 전하렴, 내가 그와 결혼하고 싶어 하더라고, 그리만 되면 넌 매일 아침 우유로 세수하고 포도주를 마시게 될 게다, 하지만 내 딸은 물로 씻고 물을 마실 거다.”
소녀가 집으로 가 아빠에게 그 여자가 한 말을 전했어요.
남자가 말했어요.
“이럴 어쩐담? 결혼은 즐거움이자 고통의 시작인데.”
결국 남자가 결론을 내리지 못하고서, 우연히 장화를 벗다 말했어요.  
“이 장화를 받거라, 안에 구멍이 하나 났지 뭐냐. 그걸 가지고 다락방으로 가 큰 못에 건 다음 안에 물을 부어보거라. 만약 물이 담아지면 내가 재혼을 하겠다, 하지만 물이 새면 재혼하지 않으마.”
소녀가 아빠 말씀대로 했어요. 하지만 쏟아 부은 물이 한 데 모아지며 물이 장화 꼭대기까지 차올랐어요.
소녀가 아빠에게 어찌되었는지 결과를 알려주었어요.
그러자 아빠가 직접 올라와 딸의 말이 맞는 걸 확인했어요. 
남자는 과부에게 가 구혼했어요.
결혼식이 치러졌어요.
다음 날 아침 두 소녀가 일어나보니, 남자의 딸 앞에는 씻으라며 우유가 놓여 있고 마시라며 포도주가 놓여있었어요.
하지만 여자의 딸 앞에는 씻으라며 물이 놓여 있고 마시라며 또 물이 놓여 있었어요.
두 번째 날 남자의 딸과 여자의 딸 앞에 똑같이 씻을 물과 마실 물이 각각 놓여있었어요.
세 번째 날 아침이 되자, 남자의 딸 앞엔 씻을 물과 마실 물이 놓여있는데 반해, 여자의 딸 앞엔 씻으라며 우유가 놓여 있고 마시라며 포도주가 놓여 있었어요.
이후 줄곧 그랬어요.
여자는 의붓딸에게 끔찍이도 모질게 대했어요. 나날이 더 의붓딸을 괴롭히는데 열중했어요.
그녀는 또한 의붓딸이 아름답고 사랑스러운데 자신의 딸은 못생기고 역겨운 것에 질투를 느꼈어요.
추운 겨울 어느 날, 모든 것이 돌처럼 꽁꽁 얼고, 언덕과 계곡이 눈으로 뒤덮인 날, 여자가 종이로 드레스를 한 벌 만들더니 의붓딸을 불러 말했어요.
“여기, 이 드레스를 입고 숲으로 가 딸기 한 바구니를 내게 가져오거라. 왠지 딸기가 땡기는 구나.”
“어머 세상에!”라며 소녀가 말했어요. “겨울에 나는 딸기는 없어요! 땅도 다 얼었고, 사방에 눈이 수북한데요. 게다가 이 엄동설한에 이런 종이 드레스를 입고 가라니요? 밖이 너무 추워 이걸 입고 가다간 얼어 죽고 말 거예요! 드레스 사이로 바람이 불면 가시가 제 몸을 찢는 거 같을 걸요.”
“내 말을 또 거역하겠다는 거니?”라며 새엄마가 말했어요. “당장 나가, 가서 딸기 한 바구니를 구할 때까진 여기에 다시 네 얼굴을 드밀 생각은 마!”
그런 다음 새엄마는 의붓딸에게 빵 한 조각을 주며 말했어요.
“이거면 하루는 버틸게다.”
그러면서 새엄마는 생각했어요.
‘밖에서 얼어 죽던 굶어 죽던 네가 알아서 하고, 다신 여기에 얼굴 내밀지 마라.’
그래서 처녀는 복종해 그 종이 드레스를 걸치고 바구니를 품고 안고 길을 나섰어요.
정말이지 넓은 지역에 걸쳐 눈 밖에 보이지 않았어요. 초록색 이파리라곤 눈을 씻고 봐도 안 보였고요.
그녀가 숲으로 들어서니 작은 집 한 채가 나왔어요. 그 집에선 세 명의 난쟁이들이 밖을 엿보고 있었어요.
그녀가 그들에게 “좋은 날 되세요.”라고 인사를 드린 후 똑똑 정중히 노크를 했어요.
그들이 소리쳤어요.
“들어와.”
그래서 소녀가 방으로 들어가 난로 옆에 있던 긴 의자에 앉아 몸을 데우며 자신의 식사를 하기 시작했어요.
엘프(요정)들이 말했어요.
“우리도 좀 줘.”
“그래요.”라며 그녀가 말하며 자신이 먹던 빵을 반으로 나눈 다음 그 반을 그들에게 주었어요.
그들이 물었어요.
“넌 이 추운 겨울날 왜 숲에 오게 된 거니, 그것도 그렇게 얇은 드레스를 입고서?”
“아,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “딸기 한 바구니를 찾아야 해서요, 그걸 구할 때까진 집에 못 돌아가요.”
그녀가 자신의 빵을 마저 먹고 있는데, 그들이 그녀에게 비(빗자루)를 하나 주며 말했어요.
“이걸로 뒷문에 있는 눈을 쓸어봐.”
소녀가 밖으로 나가자, 세 명의 난쟁이들이 서로서로 말했어요.
“우리 저애에게 뭘 줄까, 저애는 너무 착해서 자기가 먹던 빵도 우리에게 나누어주었잖니?”
그러자 첫 번째 난쟁이가 말했어요.
“내 선물은, 그녀가 매일 매일 더 예쁘지는 거야.”
두 번째 난쟁이가 말했어요.
“그럼 내 선물은, 그녀가 말을 할 때마다 그녀 입에서 금화가 한 닢씩 나오는 거야.”
세 번째 난쟁이가 말했어요.
“그렇담 내 선물은, 왕이 도착해 저 애를 아내로 맞이해 데려가는 거야.”
그때 소녀는 난쟁이들이 지시한 대로 비(빗자루)를 들고서 작은 집 뒤편에 있던 눈을 쓸고 있었어요.
그런데 눈 속에서 아주 어두운 빨강 뭔가가 튀어나와 뭔지 보니 어머나 이건 진짜 잘 익은 딸기이지 뭐예요!
어머, 어머, 어머, 그녀가 너무도 기뻐 황급히 그것을 바구니에 잔뜩 담곤, 난쟁이들에게 감사의 인사를 하며 그들 각자와 다 악수를 나누었어요. 그런 다음 자신이 무엇을 구한 지 보여드리려 새엄마가 있는 집으로 달려갔어요.
그녀가 집에 들어와 저녁인사를 하는데, 불쑥 그녀의 입에서 금화 한 닢이 떨어지지 뭐예요.
게다가 숲에서 무슨 일이 있었는지를 말하는데 그녀가 한 마디 할 때마다 그녀의 입에서 금화들이 막 쏟아져 곧 온 방을 금화로 가득 채우는 거예요.
“아니 이 고얀 것이 있나,”라며 의붓 자매가 소리쳤어요. “아주 그냥 금으로 도배질을 하는구나!”
하지만 속으로 진심 부러워 자신이 직접 딸기를 구하러 숲으로 가고 싶어졌어요.
엄마가 말했어요.
“아니다, 얘야, 그러다 이 추운 날 얼어 죽는다.”
하지만 여자의 딸은 가만있질 못하고 우겨 엄마가 결국 져, 그녀에게 엄청 두꺼운 모피(=가죽) 드레스를 지어주며 그걸 입고 가게 했어요. 물론 버터를 바른 빵과 케이크도 가지고 가 먹으라고 주었고요.
소녀는 숲으로 들어가 곧장 그 작은 집으로 향했어요. 
세 난쟁이들이 다시 밖을 엿보고 있었지만, 소녀는 그들에게 인사를 안 하고 그들을 쳐다보지도 않고 말도 걸지 않은 채 귀찮다는 듯 방으로 들어가 난로 옆에 앉아 자신의 케이크와 버터 바른 빵을 냠냠 먹기 시작했어요.
“우리도 좀 줘.”라며 난쟁이들이 소리쳤어요.
하지만 그녀는 대답하길,
“내 먹을 거도 모자란데, 다른 사람 줄 게 어딨다는 거니?”
그녀가 다 먹었을 때, 난쟁이들이 말했어요.
“자 여기 비(빗자루)가 있어, 우리를 위해 이걸로 뒷문 밖 눈을 쓸어줘.”
“흥! 그걸 왜 내가 해 너희들이 직접 해.”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “난 너희들의 종이 아녀.”
그들이 자신에게 더 줄게 없다 여긴 그녀가 문밖으로 나가버렸어요.
그러자 난쟁이들이 서로 서로 얘기를 나누었어요.
“우리 저 애에겐 뭘 주지, 저 애는 저렇게 거만하고 못된 심보를 지녀 누구에게도 착한 일 한 번 해 본 거 같지 않은데?”
첫 번째 난쟁이가 말했어요.
“난 저 애에게 맨날 매날 더 못생겨지는 벌을 줄래.”
두 번째 난쟁이도 말했어요.
“난 저 애가 말을 할 때마다 입에서 두꺼비가 한 마리씩 나오는 벌을 줄래.”
그러자 세 번째 난쟁이도 말했어요.
“난 저 애가 끔찍하게 죽는 벌을 줄래.”
밖에 나온 처녀가 딸기가 있는지 살펴보았지만 하나도 찾지 못하고 분통을 터뜨리며 집으로 돌아갔어요.
집에 도착해 숲에서 무슨 일이 있었는지 자신의 엄마에게 말하려고 입을 열자마자, 그리고 그녀가 말을 할 때마다, 그녀의 입에선 두꺼비가 한 마리씩 튀어 나왔어요, 그 바람에 모두들 그녀를 끔찍하게 여겼어요. 
이제 더 화가 난 새엄마는 하루 온 종일 어떻게 하면 나날이 더 아름다워만 가는 ‘남자의 딸’을 해칠까 그 생각만 했어요.
그러다 결국 큰 냄비를 하나 가져와 불 위에 놓은 다음 ‘실’(바느질 할 때 사용하는 실)을 잔뜩 넣은 다음 팔팔 끓였어요.
다 끓인 후, 새엄마는 그 뜨거운 실을 가엾은 소녀의 어깨 위에 걸치면서 도끼 한 자루를 주며 꽁꽁 언 강으로 가서 얼음에 구멍을 내고 이 실들을 다 찬물에 헹구고 오라고 말했어요. 
소녀는 복종해 거기로 가 얼음에 구멍을 냈어요.
그녀가 한 참 헹구고 있는데, 왕이 탄 화려한 마차 한 대가 다가오는 거예요.
마차가 멈추더니 왕이 물었어요.
“가엾은 애야, 너는 누구며, 여기서 지금 무얼 하는 게냐?”
“저는 불쌍한 소녀에요, 지금 실들을 헹구고 있었어요.”
그때 왕은 이 소녀에게 큰 동정심을 느꼈어요, 그래서 왕이 소녀를 찬찬히 보니 그녀가 무척 예쁜 거예요, 그래서 왕이 소녀에게 말했어요.
“너 나와 함께 가지 않으련?”
“아, 네, 기꺼이요.”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. 왜냐면 정말로 새엄마와 의붓 자매에게서 도망치는 게 기뻤거든요.
그리하여 그녀는 마차를 얻어 타고 왕과 함께 갔어요.
그들은 궁전에 도착한 다음 아주 화려한 행렬과 함께, 세 난쟁이들이 예건한 대로, 결혼식을 아주 성대하게 올렸어요.
1년 후, 젊은 왕비는 아들을 한 명 낳았어요.
그때쯤 새엄마도 의붓딸이 크게 출세했다는 소문을 듣게 되었어요. 그래서 자기 딸과 함께 궁전으로 가 순수한 의도로 왕비를 방문하러 온 척 연기했어요.
하지만 일단 왕이 출타하고 아무도 없자, 이 사악한 새엄마는 왕비의 머리채를 잡고, 그리고 그녀의 딸은 왕비의 발을 붙잡았어요. 그들은 그렇게 왕비를 침대에서 들어 올려 창문 바로 옆에 흐르던 시내로 던져버렸어요.
그런 다음 못생긴 딸이 대신 왕비의 침대에 누웠어요. 늙은 여자(못생긴 딸의 엄마)는 그녀의 머리까지 이불을 덮어주었어요.
집에 다시 돌아온 왕이 자신의 아내와 얘기하고 싶어 하자, 늙은 여자가 큰소리로 말했어요.
“쉿, 쉿, 지금은 안 돼요, 저 애는 지금 땀이 심하게 나서 누워있어요. 오늘은 푹 쉬게 두어야 해요.” 
어떤 의심도 않은 왕은 그 다음날 아침에서야 다시 찾아왔어요.
왕이 아내와 대화하는 동안, 그녀가 대답을 할 때마다 두꺼비가 한 마리씩 튀어나오는 거예요. 예전엔 금화가 한 닢씩 튀어나왔는데 말이죠.
그래서 이게 어찌된 영문인지 왕이 아내에게 물었어요.
그러자 늙은 여자는 이게 다 심한 땀 때문이라고 말하며 곧 다시 몸이 성하게 될 거라 말했어요.
하지만 그 날 밤에 부엌에서 접시를 닦는 사람이 이렇게 말하며 도랑(배수구)을 거슬러 올라가며 수영하는 오리 한 마리를 보았어요.
“왕께선 지금 무엇을 하시고 계시나요? 주무시나요, 아님 깨어 계신가요?”
그리고 접시닦이에게서 아무런 대답이 없자, 오리가 재차 말하길,
“제 손님들은 지금 무얼 하고 있나요?”
접시닦이가 말했어요.
“그들‘도’ 푹 자고 있어요.”
그러자 오리가 다시 묻기를,
“제 아가야는 무얼 하나요?”
접시닦이가 대답하길,
“요람(아기침대)에서 자고 있어요.”
그러자 오리가 2층으로 오더니 왕비의 모습으로 변하며 아기를 돌봤어요. 아기의 침대를 흔들어주고 이불을 꼭 덮어주고 그런 다음 다시 오리의 모습으로 변해 도랑(배수구)으로 가 유유히 헤엄쳐갔어요.
그녀(오리)는 이틀 연속 그렇게 왔어요.
세 번째 밤 그녀(오리)가 접시닦이에게 말했어요.
“가서 왕께 전하게요. 왕의 검을 가지고 와 제 어깨 위로 세 번 흔드시라고요.”
그래서 접시닦이가 달려가 이 사실을 왕께 알렸어요.
왕이 검을 쥐고 달려와 그 혼령의 위로 검을 세 번 흔들자, 세 번째 흔들 때 왕은 자신의 아내가 굳건하고 생생하며 건강한 예전 모습 그대로 자신 앞에 서 있는 걸 보았어요.
그런 까닭에 왕은 크게 기뻐했어요. 
하지만 일단 왕은 일요일, 그러니까 아기가 세례(종교의식)를 받기로 한 일요일까진 왕비를 어떤 침실에다 숨겼어요.
세례가 끝난 다음, 왕이 말했어요.
“다른 이를 침대에서 끌어내 물속에 빠뜨린 이를 어찌해야하는가?”
“그런 놈은, 냉큼 잡아다 못이 가득한 통 속에 넣어 언덕에서부터 물속으로 굴러 보냄이,”라며 늙은 여자(왕비의 새엄마)가 대답했어요. “응당 가당하리라 생각됩니다.”
“그렇담,”라며 왕이 말했어요. “네가 말한 대로 판결을 집행하리라.”
그래서 왕은 그런 통을 가져오게 지시를 내린 다음, 늙은 여인을 그녀의 딸과 함께 통 속에 넣은 다음 뚜껑을 못으로 쳐 막았다.
언덕에서부터 굴러 보낸 그 통은 결국 강 속에 퐁당 빠지고 말았어요.


(끝)

동화 「숲 속의 세 난쟁이」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「숲 속의 세 난쟁이」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter13.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



14. 실 잣는 세 여인네들


■ 참고사항 : 동화 속에 나오는 ‘아마 방적’이란?

유튜브(영어설명) 링크 ▶ https://youtu.be/8Qw6pVgw9UU?t=3s
아마 방적 : 아마 껍질의 섬유로 실을 만드는 일. 
물레가 도는 방식 : 물레가 돌면, 바늘인 가락이 따라 돌면서, 실을 감음.

제가 실 잣는 걸 전혀 이해 못하거든요. 실 잣는다 고 할 때 잣는다란 말 뜻조차 이해가 안 됨. ㅜ_ㅜ 유튜브 봐도 잘 모르겠음, 솔직히. 그래서 이번 동화(실 잣는 세 여인네들) 해석을 읽으실 때 말이 안 되면 단어가 나와도 이해 바래요. 최대한 어색하지 않게 해석했음. 여하튼 쏘오리 해요~ 

(분문 시작)

실 잣는 세 여인네들

옛날 옛적에 게을러서 실을 잣지(만들지) 않으려는 소녀가 한 명 있었어요.
엄마가 뭐라 그래도 소녀는 꿈쩍도 안 했어요.
결국 엄마는 꼭지가 도셔서 소녀를 막 때렸어요.
그래서 소녀가 펑펑 울기 시작했어요.
때마침 왕비님이 마차를 타고 지나가시다, 소녀가 우는 소리에 마차를 멈추시곤 집으로 들어와 엄마에게 이 소녀가 무슨 잘못을 그리 했기에 애를 때려서 도로가에까지 울음소리가 들리게 하느냐고 물었어요.
엄마는 차마 자기 딸이 너무도 게을러 때렸다는 말을 죽어도 못하고 이리 말했어요.
“얘보고 실을 그만 짜라는데도(만들라는데도) 말을 듣질 않아서요. 어찌나 끊임없이 실을 짜대는지, 저는 가난해 그 많은 ‘아마’(아마 껍질의 섬유는 천을 짜는데 쓰임)를 대줄 수가 없어서요.”
그러자 왕비가 대답했어요.
“왜 난 실 잣는 소리가 그리도 듣기 좋던데, 물레가 윙윙 돌아가는 걸 들으면 난 그보다 더 행복할 수도 없어. 자네 딸을 내가 궁전으로 데려가게 하게나. 내겐 아마가 충분히 있으니 저 애가 마음 내킬 대로 충분히 실을 잣고도 남을 걸세.”
엄마는 진심 그 소리가 반가웠어요.
그리하여 왕비가 소녀를 데리고 갔어요.
그들이 궁전에 도착하자, 왕비는 소녀를 데리고 방바닥에서부터 방 꼭대기까지 전부다 최고급 아마로 가득 들이차 있는 방 세 개를 보여주었어요.
“자 이 아마들로 실을 잣거라(만들거라).”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “이걸 다 해내면, 내 장남을 네 남편으로 주겠다. 네가 비록 가난하지만, 네가 그리도 지치지 않고 근면하다고 하니 ‘신부의 혼인 지참금’(결혼할 때 신부가 가지고 가는 돈)으로 충분할 게다, 그러니 지참금은 신경 쓰지 말거라.”
소녀는 멘붕이 왔어요. 왜냐면 그녀는 아마로 실을 짜는 걸 전혀 모르기 때문이죠. 게다가 지금 방 세 개에 가득 찬 아마의 양으로 봤을 때 소녀가 장장 300년은 밤낮으로 종일토록 일을 해도 다해낼까 말까 한 걸요.
그리하여 홀로 남게 되자 소녀는 울기 시작했어요, 그래서 주어진 3일 동안 손 하나 까딱하지 않고 앉아 울기만 했어요.
세 번째 날 왕비가 왔는데, 소녀가 실을 하나도 안 만들어 놓은 것을 봤어요.
왕비는 깜짝 놀라 무슨 일이 있냐고 물었어요.
그러자 소녀는 용서를 구하며 엄마 집을 떠나와 마음이 싱숭생숭하여 도무지 일에 손을 댈 수 없었노라고 말했어요.
왕비가 이 말에 무척 안심했어요. 그래서 떠나며 말했어요.
“그래도 내일부턴 실을 만들기 시작하거라.”
또다시 혼자만 남게 된 소녀는 뭘 어떻게 해야 될지 몰라 창가로 가 비탄에 잠겨 있었어요.
그때 세 여인이 그녀(소녀)쪽으로 오는데 보였어요.
첫 번째 여인은 넓고 평평한 발을 가졌어요. 두 번째 여인은 턱까지 내려오는 아랫입술을 가졌어요. 세 번째 여인은 넓은 엄지손가락을 가졌어요.
창문 앞에 서 있던 그녀들이 고개를 들어 소녀에게 무슨 문제라도 있기에 그리 슬픈지 물었어요.
소녀가 자신의 문제를 털어놓았어요.
그러자 그녀들이 자신들이 그 일을 도와주겠노라 말했어요.
“대신 우리를 네 결혼식 날 식탁테이블에 초대해줘, 그럼 우리가 네 몫의 아마로 실을 만들어줄 게, 금방 다 될 거야.”
“기꺼이 그러고 말고요.”라며 소녀가 대답했어요. “그럼 이리로 들어오셔서 일을 시작해주세요.”
그리하여 소녀는 그 세 낮선 여인네들을 들어오게 해 첫 번째 방에다 자리를 마련해드렸다. 
여인네들은 거기에 자리를 잡곤 실을 만들기 시작했다. 
한 분은 물레바퀴에 발을 디디고선 (물레가 돌면, 바늘인 가락이 따라 돌면서, 실을 감음) 실을 뽑았고, 다른 분은 그 실을 아랫입술로 촉촉이 젖시셨고, 나머지 한 분이 자신의 엄지손가락으로 그 실을 꼬아 탁자 위에 탁탁 내리치셨다. 그녀가 한 번씩 내리칠 때마다 최고급 품질의 ‘실테’(일정하게 감은 실의 분량)가 완성되어 바닥에 떨어졌다. 
소녀는 실 잣는 세 여인네들의 존재를 왕비에겐 숨겼다.
왕비가 올 땐 엄청나게 쌓인 완성품들만 보여드렸다. 
왕비는 소녀를 칭찬했다.
첫 번째 방이 텅 비자 소녀와 세 여인네들은 두 번째 방으로 갔다. 
마침내 세 번째 방도 텅 비고 아주 빨리 일을 끝낼 수 있었다. 
그런 다음 세 여인네들이 작별인사를 하며 소녀에게 말했다. 
“알겠지, 우리를 네 결혼식 식탁테이블로 초대하겠단 약속 잊으면 안 돼. 우리가 네게 행운을 가져다 줄 거거든.”
처녀가 왕비에게 빈 방들과 수북이 쌓인 실들을 보여주자, 왕비가 결혼식을 준비하라 지시하셨어요.
신랑은 뛸 듯이 기뻤어요, 이렇게 손재주 있고 근면한 아내를 맞게 되었으니까요. 
신랑이 아내를 입에 침이 마르도록 칭찬했어요.
“제겐 세 분의 아주머니들이 계세요,”라며 그 소녀가 말했어요. “그분들 다 제게 무척 잘해주셨어요. 그래서 그 분들이 참석하셔서 제 복을 빌어주는 걸 마다하지 않으려고요. 제가 그분들을 결혼식에 초대해 저희와 함께 식사테이블에 앉혀드리는 걸 허락해주세요”
왕비와 신랑(왕자)이 말했어요.
“그걸 마다 할 리가 없지 않소?”
그런 까닭에 융숭한 연회(큰잔치)가 시작되었을 때, 세 분의 여인네들이 낮선 옷을 입고 입장하게 되셨어요.
신부가 말했어요.
“어서오세요, 사랑하는 아주머니들.”
“아니,”라며 신랑이 말했어요. “세상에 어찌도 저리도 못생겼단 말인가?”
그 후 즉시 신랑이 발이 펑퍼짐한(넓은) 여인에게 가서 말했어요.
“아주머니는 어쩌다 이리도 발이 넓어지셨는지요?”
“물레바퀴(바퀴가 돌면서 바늘인 가락이 돌아 실을 감음)를 밟고,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “또 밟다보니.”
그런 다음 신랑(왕자)은 두 번째 여인에게 가 말을 걸어보았어요.
“그럼 아주머니는 어쩌다 아랫입술이 이리도 축 쳐지게 되셨어요?”
“실을 아랫입술로,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “젓시고 또 젓시다보니.” 
그러자 그가 세 번째 여인에게 물어보았어요.
“그렇담 아주머니는 어쩌다 엄지손가락이 이리도 널찍해지신 건가요?”
“실을 꼬고,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “또 꼬다 보니.”
이 대답들에 경악한 왕자님이 말했어요.
“내 아름다운 신부에겐 절대 그 흉측한 물레에 손도 못 대게 하리라.”
그리하여 소녀는 지긋지긋한 ‘아마 방적’(아마 껍질의 섬유로 실을 만드는 일. ‘아마 방적’-영어설명-유튜브 링크 ▶ https://youtu.be/8Qw6pVgw9UU?t=3s ←맨 위에서 링크한 영상과 같은 영상임)에서 벗어날 수 있었답니다. 


(끝)

동화 「실 잣는 세 여인네들」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「실 잣는 세 여인네들」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter14.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



15. 헨젤과 그레텔


■ 미리알림

“그림형제의 동화는 좀 기분 나쁠 수 있음.”
그림형제의 동화는 백 년 전 동화라, 지금 읽으면 내용이 좀, 기분이 나쁠 수가 있습니다. 만약 읽으시다가 “나와 안 맞다” 싶으면 이상한 것이 아니니 굳이 무리하면서까지 다 읽으시려하지 마시고 이번 동화는 건너뛰시고 다른 동화 해석할 때 제 블로그를 다시 읽으시면 됩니다.
진지하게 읽지 마시고 그냥 유명한 동화의 원작을 접한다는 마음으로 가볍게 접근하시면 좋을 거 같아요. :)
 
(분문 시작)

헨젤과 그레텔

울창한 숲에 자신의 아내와 두 아이와 함께 힘들게 사는 어느 가난한 나무꾼이 있었어요.
두 아이(남매)의 이름은 각각, 헨젤(오빠이름)과 그레텔(여동생이름)이었어요.
나무꾼은 정말 입에 풀칠도 못할 만큼 가난했어요.
그런데 대기근(굶주림)이 이 지역에도 덮치자, 이젠 정말이지 더는 빵을 구할 수가 없게 되었어요.
그래서 아빠는 누워서도 생각하고 또 생각했어요. 그러다 근심으로 잠을 못 이루던 어느 날 끙끙 앓으며 아내에게 말했어요.
“우리 이제 어쩌지? 먹을 게 다 떨어지면 이제 정말 저 애들을 어떻게 먹여 살리냐고?” 
“실은 말이야, 나도 할 얘기가 있는데, 여보,”라며 여자가 말했어요. “내일 아침 일찍 우리가 저 애들을 가장 울창한 숲 속으로 데려가, 모닥불을 피운 후 빵 한 조각씩만 나눠준 후, 우린 땔감을 구하고 간다고 하고서 자리를 떠는 거야. 그럼 저 애들만 남을 거잖아. 그리되면 집으로 오는 방법을 못 찾을 거니 저 애들을 떼어놓을 수가 있지.”
“아니, 여보,”라며 나무꾼이 말했어요. “난 그렇게는 못해. 어떻게 내 자식들을 숲에 남겨둔단 말이야?… 사나운 동물이라도 만나 물어뜯기면 어쩌려고.”
“이 팔푼아(모자라는 사람)!”라며 아내가 말했어요. “그럼 우리 넷 다 굶어죽어야 속이 후련하겠냐, 왜 이 참에 아예 관 네 개 만들지 그래.”
그래서 아내는 남편이 동의해줄 때까지 들볶았어요.
“하지만 저 불쌍한 아이들에겐 너무 미안해, 여전히.”라며 남편이 말했어요.
두 남매도 잠을 이루지 못하고 있었는데, 배가 고파서예요.
그러다 새엄마가 아빠에게 말하는 내용을 엿듣게 된 거죠.
그레텔(여동생)이 비통한 눈물을 흘리며 헨젤(오빠)에게 말했어요.
“이제 우린 끝났어.”
“조용히 해, 그레텔(여동생),”라며 헨젤(오빠)이 말했어요. “마음 굳게 먹어, 곧 방도(살아날 방법)가 있을 거야.”
어른들이 모두 잠이 들자, 헨젤(오빠)은 일어나 작은 조끼를 입은 다음 아래쪽 문을 열고서 밖으로 기어나갔어요.
달빛이 밝게 빛났어요.
집 앞에 놓여 있는 새하얀 조약돌들이 달빛을 받아 마치 은화처럼 반짝거렸어요.
헨젤(오빠)은 몸을 굽혀 그 조약돌들을 꽤 많이 자신의 작은 조끼 속에 가능한 한 많이 담았어요.
그런 다음 헨젤(오빠)은 다시 돌아가 그레텔(여동생)에게 말했어요.
“일단 마음 놓고, 편히 자, 사랑하는 동생아, 하느님도 우릴 저버리시진 않을 거야.”
헨젤(오빠)도 다시 잠이 들었어요.
아직 해가 뜨기 전 동이 텄을 때(=새벽) 새엄마가 오더니 두 남매를 깨우며 말했어요.
“일어나, 이 게으름뱅이들아! 오늘 숲으로 땔감 주어러 갈 거니 그리 알아.”
새엄마가 두 아이에게 작은 빵을 하나씩 주며 말했어요.
“나중에 먹을 거니까, 그때까진 입도 대지 마, 왜냐면 먹을 게 아무 것도 없을 수도 있으니까.”
헨젤(오빠)의 호주머니 속엔 조약돌들이 들어 있었기 때문에, 그레텔(여동생)이 자신의 앞치마에 그 빵들을 넣었어요.
그런 다음 그들 모두는 함께 숲으로 출발했어요.
조금씩 걸었을 때마다, 헨젤(오빠)은 멈춰 서서 힐끗 집 쪽을 뒤돌아봤어요, 헨젤(오빠)은 그러길 반복했어요.
아빠가 말했어요.
“헨젤아, 뭘 쳐다보는 거니, 뭐 남겨두고 온 거라도 있니? 그렇게 딴 생각만 하다간 발을 헛딛는다.”
“아 아빠,”라며 헨젤(오빠)이 말했어요. “새하얀 새끼 고양이를 바라다보고 있었어요, 지붕에 앉아 있아 있는 게 혹 제게 안녕히 가라고 인사를 건네는 거 같아서요.”
새엄마도 끼어들었어요. 
“이 멍충아, 저기에 고양이가 어디 있다는 거야, 굴뚝 위에 아침 해가 비치는 거잖아.”
그렇지만 헨젤(오빠)은 고양이를 쳐다본 게 아니었어요. 호주머니에 있던 조약돌들을 하나씩 길에 끊임없이 던지고 있었던 거예요.  
그들이 숲 한 복판에 도착하자, 아빠가 말했어요.
“자, 나무를 좀 줍거라, 얘들아, 그럼 너희들이 춥지 않게 내가 불을 좀 피우마.”
헨젤(오빠)과 그레텔(여동생)은 함께 작은 나뭇가지들을 잔뜩 모았어요.
나뭇가지들에 불을 붙이고 화염(불길)이 일자 새엄마가 말했어요.
“자, 너희들은, 불 옆에 앉아 있어, 우린 숲으로 들어가 나무를 베어올 테니. 다 베면 돌아와 너희들을 데려가마.” 
헨젤(오빠)과 그레텔(여동생)은 불 옆에 앉아 있었어요.
점심시간이 되자 각각 빵을 먹었어요.
도끼로 나무를 찍는 소리가 들려왔기 때문에 남매는 아빠가 가까이 있다는 것을 믿어의심치 않았어요.
하지만 그건 도끼 찍는 소리가 아니라, 말라 죽은 나뭇가지에 바람이 세차게 앞뒤로 불면서 내는 소리였어요.
남매는 한참을 앉아 있다 눈꺼풀이 무거워져 그만 잠이 들고 말았어요. 
마침내 남매가 잠에서 깨고 보니 벌써 날은 무척이나 어두워져 있는 상태였어요.
그레텔(여동생)이 울기 시작하더니 말했어요.
“이제 어떻게 숲에서 빠져 나가?”
하지만 헨젤(오빠)은 동생을 안심시키며 말했어요.
“잠깐만 기다려봐, 곧 달이 떠오를 거니까, 그럼 금방 길을 찾을 수 있을 거야.”
곧 보름달이 떠올랐어요.
그러자 헨젤(오빠)은 자신의 여동생의 손을 쥐고서 새 은화동전처럼 반짝반짝 빛나는 조약돌들을 따라 천천히 걷기 시작했어요.  
남매는 밤새 걸어 날이 샐 무렵(새벽)에 다시 한 번 아빠의 집에 도착했다. 
남매가 문을 똑똑 노크하자 새엄마가 문을 열더니 그게 헨젤(오빠)과 그레텔(여동생)이란 것을 확인하고는 말했다. 
“이 되먹지 못한 것들아, 숲에서 왜 이렇게 오래 있었어?…… 우린 너희들이 다신 안 돌아올 줄 알았지!” 
하지만 아빠는 기뻤어요. 왜냐면 남매만 숲에 남기고 온 게 여간 마음 아프지 않았거든요. 
그 후 오래지 않아, 전국에 대기근(굶주림)이 유행하기 시작했어요. 
그리고 남매는 밤에 새엄마가 아빠에게 이렇게 말하는 것을 엿듣게 되었어요.
“식량도 이제 다 먹었어, 남은 건 빵 반 덩어리가 다야, 이거 먹고 나면 이젠 끝이야. 아이들을 데려다 이번엔 좀 더 숲 깊숙이로 들어가 봐, 그럼 다신 길을 찾지 못할 거야. 이 방법 밖에는 도리가 없잖아!” 
아빠의 마음이 무거워졌어요.
아빠가 생각했어요.
“얼마 안 되는 식량이라도 나눠 먹음 안 될까.”
하지만 새엄마는 막무가내였어요. 그래서 남편을 들볶고 나무랬어요.
게다가 아빠는 누가 옆에서 뭐라 그러면 그런 줄로만 아는 사람이었어요.
그래서 지난번에도 아내의 잔소리에 굴복했듯 이번에도 또한 아내말대로 하기로 하고 말았답니다.
하지만 이번에도 아이들은 깨어있다 이 대화를 듣게 되었어요.
어른들이 잠이 들자, 헨젤(오빠)은 이번에도 몰래 일어나 밖으로 나가 저번처럼 조약돌들을 잔뜩 호주머니 속에 담아서 올 생각이었는데, 아뿔싸 새엄마가 문을 잠가두어서 헨젤(오빠)은 밖으로 나갈 수가 없었어요.
그럼에도 불구하고 헨젤(오빠)은 어린 여동생을 안심시키며 말했어요.
“울지마, 얘, 조용히 자자구나, 하느님께서 우릴 도와주실 거야.”
아침 일찍 새엄마가 오더니 아이들을 침대에서 끄집어냈어요. ㅜ.ㅜ
그런 다음 남매에게 각각 빵을 조금씩 나눠주었어요.
하지만 지난번보다 훨씬 더 작은 양이었어요.
숲으로 가는 도중 헨젤(오빠)은 호주머니에서 자기 빵을 잘게 부수며 종종 멈춰 서서 빵에 빵 한 조각씩을 내던졌어요.
“헨젤아, 서서 뭘 그리 보고 있니?”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “어서 가자구나.”
“지붕 위에 앉아 있는 자그마한 비둘기 한 마리가 잘 가라고 제게 인사하는 것 같아서 뒤돌아보고 있었던 거예요.”라며 헨젤(오빠)이 대답했어요.
“얼간아!”라며 새엄마가 말했어요. “저게 뭐가 네 작은 비둘기란 거냐, 그건 굴뚝 위에 아침 햇살이 비추는 거야.”
하지만 헨젤(오빠)은 조금씩 길에 빵 조각들을 내던졌어요.
새엄마는 남매를 이끌고 숲 더 깊숙이 남매들이 전에 와 봤던 곳보다 훨씬 더 숲 깊숙이로 데리고 갔어요.
그런 다음 큰 불을 피우더니 새엄마가 말했어요.
“너희들은, 거기 가만히 앉아 있어라, 피곤하면 잠시 눈을 붙여도 된다. 우리들은 숲으로 가서 나무를 벨 거니, 우리 일이 다 끝나는 저녁에 다시 와서 너희들을 데리고 가마.”
낮 12시가 되었어요, 그래서 그레텔(여동생)이 자기 몫의 빵을 오빠와 나눠 먹었어요. 헨젤(오빠)의 빵은 오는 도중에 다 흩뿌렸으니까요.
그런 다음 남매는 잠이 들었고, 저녁이 되었는데도, 어머나 세상에, 아무도 이 불쌍한 아이들을 찾으러 오지 않는 거예요.
밤이 늦도록 남매는 깨어있었어요, 무서워서요.
헨젤(오빠)이 어린 동생을 안심시키며 말했어요.
“기다려보자, 그레텔(여동생이름), 달이 떠오르면, 그러면 내가 오는 길에 흩뿌려놓았던 빵 조각들이 보이기 시작할 거야, 그럼 집으로 갈 수 있을 거야.”
달이 떠오르고 남매가 출발하려고 보니, 이런, 빵 조각들이 안 보이는 거예요, 왜냐하면 숲과 들에 사는 수 천 마리의 새들이 달려들어 빵 조각들을 모두 쪼아 먹었기 때문이지요.
헨젤(오빠)이 그레텔(여동생)에게 말했어요.
“곧 길을 찾을 수 있을 거야.”
하지만 남매는 도무지 길을 찾지 못하고 말았어요.
오누이는 밤새 걷고, 다음날도 아침부터 저녁때까지 걸었지만, 숲을 빠져나오지 못했어요.
그리고 배도 너무 고팠답니다. 왜냐하면 온종일 먹은 거라곤 땅에서 자라는 산딸기 두 개 내지는 세 개 먹은 게 다였거든요.
지칠 대로 지친 오누이는 너무도 피곤해서 더는 걷지 못하고, 나무 밑에 웅크리고 누워 잠이 들고 말았어요.
오늘은 오누이가 아빠의 집을 떠나온 지 3일째 되는 날이였어요.
오누이가 다시 걷기 시작했어요.
하지만 가도 가도 더 깊은 숲속으로만 갈 뿐이었어요.
빠른 시간 안에 이들에게 도움이 주어지지 않는다면, 굶주림과 배고픔에 죽게 될지도 몰라요.
한낮이 되었을 때, 큰 나뭇가지 위에 앉아 아주 상쾌한 노래를 부르고 있는 눈처럼 새하얗고 아름다운 새 한 마리를 보았어요.
그래서 오누이는 멈춰 서서 그 노래를 들었어요.
노래가 끝나자 새는 날개를 펼치더니 오누이 앞을 지나 푸드덕 날아가 버렸어요.
오누이가 그 뒤를 따라가 보니 자그마한 집 한 채에 다다르게 되었어요. 
좀 전에 봤던 새는 그 집의 지붕 위에 앉아 있었어요.
오누이가 조심스럽게 그 작은 집에 접근해서 보니 어머나 이건 빵으로 지어진 집인 거 있죠, 그리고 케이크들로 온통 뒤덮인 집이었고요, 창문들이 모두 맑은 설탕으로 만들어져 있지 뭐예요.
“이거라도 먹어서,”라며 헨젤(오빠)이 말했어요. “일단 배라도 채워보자. 내가 지붕을 조금 먹어볼 테니, 너, 그레텔(여도생)은 창문을 좀 먹어봐, 그건 맛이 달 거야.” 
헨젤(오빠)은 위로 올라가 맛을 보기 위해 지붕을 조금 부러뜨렸어요.
그리고 그레텔(여동생)은 창문에 기대 창유리를 조금 깨물어봤어요.
그러자 집안에서부터 부드러운 음성이 울렸어요.
“깨물짝(=깨무는 소리), 깨물짝, 아그작(=씹는 소리). 누가 내 사랑스런 집을 갉아먹고 있는 거니?”
아이들이 대답했어요.
“바람이에요, 바람이에요, 하늘에서 내려온 바람이에요.”
그리곤 아랑곳하지 않고서 계속해서 먹어댔어요.
지붕이 꿀맛이라 여긴 헨젤(오빠)은 지붕을 왕창 뜯었어요. 
그레텔(여동생)도 둥근 창유리 하나를 몽땅 창틀에서 떼어내 자리에 앉아 맛있게 먹고 있었어요.
갑자기 문이 “벌컥!” 하고 열리더니, 목발을 짚은, 아주 아주 나이 많은 노파(나이 많은 여인) 한 명이 기어 나오는 거예요.
그 바람에 화들짝 놀란 헨젤(오빠)과 그레텔(여동생)은 손에 들고 있던 음식을 땅에 떨어뜨리고 말았어요.
하지만 노파는 고개를 끄떡이더니 이렇게 말했어요.
“오, 귀여운 애들이군, 너희를 누가 여기로 데려온 게냐? 어서들 들어와 나와 같이 살자. 어떤 해코지도 없을 테니 염려 말고.”
노파가 손에 손을 잡고서 두 아이를 데리고 작은 집으로 들어갔어요.
그런 다음 맛난 음식을 오누이 앞에 차려주었어요.
우유와, 설탕과 사과와 땅콩이 뿌려진 팬케이크들이었어요. 
다 먹고 난 후, 두 개의 예쁘고 작은 침대에 깨끗하고 새하얀 리넨 이불이 덮여 있었는데, 헨젤(오빠)과 그레텔(여동생)은 그리로 가 누웠어요.
오누이는 여기가 분명 천국일 거라 여겼더랬죠.
노파는 무척이나 친절한 척 행동했지만, 사실은 잠복해 아이들을 기다리고 있던 사악한 마녀였어요.
아이들을 꾀기 위해 빵으로 예쁘장한 집을 지은 이유도 모두 그 때문이었고요.
아이들이 자신의 마법에 빠지고 나면, 노파는 아이들을 죽이고 요리를 해 먹었어요.
바로 이 날이 바로 노파의 그런 축제일이었던 거죠.
마녀들은 핏발이 선 눈을 가졌기 때문에 멀리 보지 못해요. 
하지만 냄새엔 짐승처럼 예리한 감각을 가지고 있죠.
그래서 인간 아이들이 가까이 접근한 걸 아는 거예요.
헨젤(오빠)과 그레텔(여동생)이 근처까지 왔을 때도 마녀는 심술궂은 웃음을 보이며 조롱하듯 말했죠.
“두 놈 걸려들었군. 절대 빠져나가지 못할 걸!”
오누이가 깨기 전 노파는 아침 일찍부터 일어나 두 뺨이 불그레한 두 아이들이 예쁘장하게 누워 자는 모습을 보며 혼자 소곤거렸어요. 
“고놈들 참 맛있겠다!”
그런 다음 주름살로 다 오그라든 자신의 손으로 헨젤(오빠)을 잡아 가축우리에 집어넣고는 쇠창살이 달린 문으로 닫았어요.
헨젤(오빠)이 비명을 질러보았지만 소용없었어요.
그런 다음 노파는 그레텔(여동생)에게로 가 흔들어 깨우며 소리쳤어요.
“냉큼 일어나 이 게으름뱅이야, 가져 물을 길어와, 그리고 네 오빠가 먹을 만한 걸로 맛난 걸 만들어봐. 그 녀석은 가축우리에 있다, 어서 살을 찌워야 해서 말이지. 살이 다 찌면 내가 먹게 될 거다.”
그레텔(여동생)이 울고불고 했어요. 하지만 전혀 소용이 없었어요.
사악한 마녀의 지시에 의해 하라는 대로 그레텔(여동생)은 할 수밖에 없었어요.
이제 최고의 요리감은 불쌍한 헨젤 오빠가 되었고, 여동생인 그레텔로서도 빼도 박도 못하는 상황이 되었어요.
매일 아침마다 노파(마녀는 시력이 나쁨)는 가축우리로 기어가 큰소리로 말했어요.
“네 손가락 좀 내밀어 봐라, 살일 포동포동 쪘는지를 봐야겠다.”
하지만 헨젤(오빠)은 노파에게 작은 뼈다귀를 내밀었어요.
눈이 침침했던 노파는 그걸 잘 볼 수 없었던지라 헨젤(오빠)의 손가락이라고만 생각하고 아무리 먹여도 살이 찌울 수 없다는 사실에 놀라워했어요.
 그렇게 4주가 다 지나도록 헨젤(오빠)이 여전히 빼빼 말라있자, 노파도 참는 데는 한계가 있었던 지라 더는 기다리지 못했어요. 
“이제 됐다, 그레텔(여동생이름),”라며 마녀가 소녀를 불렀다. “움직여라, 물 좀 길어 오고. 이젠 헨젤(오빠이름)이 쪘던 말랐던 상관없다, 내일 저 놈을 죽여서 요리해먹어야겠다.”
아, 불쌍하고 가련한 여동생은 너무도 슬퍼서 물을 기르면서도 뺨 위로 어찌나 눈물이 흐르던지요!
“오 하느님, 저희를 구해주세요,”라며 그레텔(여동생)이 울었어요. “만약 그때 숲속 사나운 동물에게 잡아 먹혔더라면 한날한시에 같이 죽었을 것을.”
“잠자코 있지 못해,”라며 마녀가 말했어요. “도움 될 일은 전혀 없을 게다.”
그리하여 아침 일찍, 그레텔(여동생)은 밖으로 나가 큰 솥에 물을 붙고 장작을 태웠어요.
“빵을 구워라,”라며 노파가 말했어요. “오븐(=가마)은 내가 벌써 데워났다, 빵 반죽 덩어리도 주물러 났고.” 
노파는 불쌍한 그레텔(여동생)을 오븐(=가마)으로 몰고 갔어요. 거기선 벌써 화염이 “탁! 탁!”하고 타오르고 있었어요.
“기어들어가서,”라며 마녀가 말했어요. “적당히 데워졌는지 봐라. 데워졌음 빵을 넣고 닫게.”
하지만 그레텔(여동생)이 일단 오븐(=가마) 안으로 들어가면 마녀는 즉시 오븐을 닫고 그녀를 구울 참이었어요. 즉 여동생인 그레텔도 잡아먹을 생각이었던 거죠.
하지만 그레텔(여동생)의 눈엔 마녀가 지금 뭔 꿍꿍이 생각을 하고 있는 게 다 보였어요.
그래서 그레텔(여동생)이 말했어요.
“어떻게 들어가는지 전 모르겠는 걸요, 어떻게 들어가는데요?”
“이 멍충아!”라며 노파가 말했어요. “문이 이렇게 큰데. 자 봐봐, 내가 시범을 보여줄 테니!”
노파는 슬금 기어오르며 오븐 속으로 고개를 넣어보였어요.
그때 그레텔(여동생)이 마녀를 “훅!” 밀쳐 오븐 훨씬 안쪽으로 넣고는 철제문을 닫아버렸어요. 그리고 걸쇠도 걸었고요.
오오! 그러자 마녀가 몹시 끔찍한 소리를 지르기 시작했어요.
하지만 그레텔(여동생)은 냉큼 그 자리를 떴답니다. 
사악한 마녀는 그렇게 거기서 죽을 때까지 태워졌답니다.
그렇지만 손살 같이 헨젤(오빠)에게 달려간 그레텔(여동생)은 가축우리를 열며 소리쳤어요.
“오빠, 우리 살았어! 늙은 마녀가 죽었어!”
헨젤(오빠)은 동생이 열어준 문을 통해 가축우리에서 한 마리 새처럼 빠져나왔어요.
오누이가 서로 부엉켜안으며 어찌나 기뻐하는지! 서로 뽀뽀하고 춤추고 난리도 아니었어요!
마녀가 죽었기 때문에 더 이상 두려울 것이 없어진 오누이가 다시 마녀의 집으로 들어가 보았어요.
구석구석 진주와 보석들로 가득 찬 궤짝들이 놓여 있지 뭐예요.
“조약돌보다 훨씬 나은데!”라고 헨젤(오빠)이 말했어요.
그러면서 헨젤(오삐)은 호주머니에 넣을 수 있는 만큼 잔뜩 진주와 보석들을 넣었어요.
그러자 그레텔(여동생)도 말했어요.
“나도 집으로 좀 가져가야지.”
그러면서 그레텔(여동생)은 앞치마를 가득채웠어요.
“지금 빠져나간다면,”라며 헨젤(오빠)이 말했어요. “마녀의 숲을 빠져나갈 수 있을 거야.”
오누이가 두 시간 가량을 걷자 꽤 큼직한 호수가 하나 나왔어요.
“어떻게 건너지,”라며 헨젤(오빠)이 말했어요. “판자때기도 안 보이고, 다리도 안 보이는데.”
“그리고 양쪽을 오고가는 보트도 없나봐,”라며 그레텔(여동생)이 말했어요. “하지만 흰 오리 하나가 저쪽에서 헤엄치고 이네. 내가 저 애한테 물어볼게, 우리를 건너게 도와줄 수 있을지 말이야.”
그런 다음 그레텔(여동생)이 소리쳤어요.
“귀여운 오리야, 사랑스런 오리야, 그래 너 말이야. 헨젤(오빠)과 그레텔(여동생)이 지금 네 도움을 기다리고 있어. 판자때기도 다리도 보이지 않거든. 우리를 네 새하얀 등에다 좀 태워서 건너게 해줄래.”
오리가 오누이에게로 왔어요.
헨젤(오빠)이 오리의 등에 앉으며 여동생보고도 옆에 앉으라고 말했어요.
“아니,”라고 그레텔(여동생)이 대꾸했어요. “그럼 새끼 오리가 감당하기엔 너무 무겁잖아. 한명씩 옮겨 달라하자.”
착한 새끼 오리는 그렇게 했어요.
오누이는 일단 안전하게 그 호수를 건넌 다음 잠시 걷자 숲이 눈에 서서히 익숙해져가는 것만 같더니 마침내 저 멀리 아빠의 집이 보였어요.
오누이는 뛰기 시작했어요.
곧 허겁지겁 거실로 돌진한 오누이가 아빠의 팔에 안겼어요. 
아이들을 그렇게 숲에다 남겨두고 온 이후로 아빠는 한 시도 행복하지 않았지요.
게다가 아이들의 새엄마도 그사이에 죽었고 말이죠.
그런데 방금 나타난 그레텔(여동생)이 방을 바삐 뛰어다니며 자신의 앞치마에 싸가지고 온 진주들과 ‘보석용 원석’(가공해 보석으로 만듦)들을 탈탈 털어내지 뭐예요.
헨젤도 또한 자신의 호주머니에서 보석 한 움큼 또 한 움큼을 그(그레텔이 내려놓은 보석들) 위에다 던지는 거예요.
그리하여 모든 근심걱정일랑은 털어버리고, 그들은 완벽한 행복 속에서 함께 살아더랬죠.
제 얘기는 여기서 끝이랍니다.(←제가 하는 얘기가 아니라 원문에 있는 문장임) 
주인(=동화 속 마녀) 없는 물건은 먼저 줍는 사람이 임자인거죠. (원문→생쥐가 거기로 도망치면, 누구든 먼저 잡는 사람은, 그 생쥐로 자신의 큰 털모자를 만들어도 된다.)(^^하하 뭔 소린지 모르겠네요. 어쨌든 헨젤과 그레텔 해석 끄~읕~ 읽어주셔서 감사합니다. 2주 전부터 제 블로그가 저품질블로그가 되는 바람에 ㅠ_ㅠ 네이버에서 검색노출이 안 되는데도 16분이 꾸준히 구독해주시네요. 땡큐~ 저품질 되도 구독이 가능하다는 것을 처음 알았거든요 ㅎㅎ )

(끝)

동화 「헨젤과 그레텔」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「헨젤과 그레텔」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter15.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



16. 세 장의 뱀 잎



옛날 옛적에 도저히 자신의 아들 하나도 먹여 살릴 수 없던 한 가난한 남자가 있었어요.
그래서 아들이 말했어요.
“아빠, 제가 짐이 되는 거 같아요. 이대로 가다간 저희 둘 다 비참해집니다. 그러니 제가 집을 나가 한 번 제 손으로 돈을 벌어 볼게요.”
그리하여 아빠는 아들에게 축복을 해준 후, 마음의 짐을 느끼며 아들을 보내주었어요.
당시 강력한 제국의 왕이 전쟁을 벌이고 있어서, 그 젊은이(아들)도 군인이 되어 왕과 함께 전장으로 나갔어요.
적군이 앞에 있고, 전투가 벌어지고, 큰 위험이 도사리는 곳.
쏟아지는 총탄에 그의 동료들이 퍽퍽 쓰러져갔어요.
결국 대장까지 죽고 말았어요.
그러자 동료들이 달아나려고 했어요.
하지만 젊은이는 앞으로 나아가며 대담무쌍하게 동료들에게 외쳤어요.
“저들에게 우리 조국이 짓밟히는 걸 내버려둘 테냐!”
그리하여 다른 동료들도 젊은이를 뒤따랐어요. 그 결과 적을 궤멸시킬 수 있었어요.
젊은이가 이번 승리에서 큰 공을 세웠음을 전해들은 왕이 젊은이를 다른 누구보다 승진시켜주고 많은 보물도 주어 젊은이는 이제 왕국 제1의 군이 되었어요.
왕에겐 무척이나 아리따운 딸내미가 하나 있었어요.
하지만 좀 별나다 못해 이상한 여인이었죠.
아 글쎄 자신의 주군이자 남편이 될 자는 자신(공주)이 먼저 죽으면 따라서 생매장 당하겠다고 서약하지 않음 안 된다는 거예요. 
바로 이런 맹세를 남편에게 강요한 것이죠.
“진심 나를 사랑한다면 그래야 하는 거 아냐,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “남은 생이 그에게 무슨 의미가 있다는 거지?”
반대로 남편이 먼저 죽으면 자신도 생매장 당하겠다고 맹세한 걸요.
이 별나다 못해 괴상한 맹세를 강요한 덕분에 이때까지 모든 청혼자들이 달아났던 거예요.
하지만 젊은이는 그녀가 예쁜 것만 보고 하트가 뿅뿅 해 앞뒤도 안 가리고 그녀를 달라 왕께 청했어요.
“자네가 어떤 서약을 해야 하는지 잘 알 테지?”라며 왕이 말했어요. “그 애와 함께 묻이는 걸세.”
젊은이가 대답했어요. “제가 그녀보다 더 오래 산다면, 상처 입은 마음이 위험을 마다하지 않을 겁니다.”
그러자 왕이 동의했어요.
그래서 결혼식이 성대화게 거행되었어요.
그들은 서로 행복하게 만족하며 한동안 잘 살았어요.
그러다 그만 젊은 왕비가 큰 중병에 걸려 어떤 의사도 그녀를 구하지 못했어요.
그렇게 아내가 죽어 묻히게 되자, 젊은 왕은 자신이 맹세한 것이 생각나 생매장 당할 걸 생각하니 소름이 끼쳤어요. 하지만 달아날 방법이 하나도 없는 걸요.
국왕이 모든 성문에 보초병들을 죄다 깔아놓았기 때문이죠.
과연 젊은 왕이 자신의 운명을 피할 방법이 없는 건가요.
그리하여 시체가 묻히기로 한 날이 되자, 그도 ‘왕족의 지하 납골당’으로 끌려갔어요. 밖에서 문이 닫히고 빗장(문을 가로지르는 막대기)이 걸어졌어요(문이 잠겼어요).
관 가까이에 탁자가 하나 놓여 있고 그 위엔 양초 4개와, 빵 4개, 포도주 4병이 놓여 있었어요. 
이 음식이 동나면 끝인 거죠. 젊은이는 굶어 죽을 수밖에 없었어요.
젊은이는 이제 고통과 슬픔에 젖어 앉아 있었어요. 그래도 매일 아주 조금의 빵과 한 모금의 포도주만 마시며 견뎌보았어요. 그럼에도 불구하고 나날이 죽음이 다가오는 게 느껴졌어요.
젊은이가 멍해져선 앞을 바라보고 있는데, 지하 납골당 한 쪽 구석에서 뱀 한 마리가 기어 나와 시신에게 다가가려는 거예요. 
시신을 물어뜯으러 가는 거라 생각한 젊은이가 검을 뽑아 들고 말했어요.
“내가 살아 있는 한, 네깟 것들이 그녀를 건들게 할 수 없다.”
그러면서 뱀을 세 동강 내버렸어요.
잠시 후 두 번째 뱀이 구멍에서 기어 나오다 다른 놈이 조각나 죽어 있는 것을 보곤 도로 들어가더니 곧 입에 세 장의 초록색 잎을 물고 나타났어요.
그런 다음 두 번째 뱀은 첫 번째 뱀의 몸을 가져와 붙여놓은 다음 그 상처들 위에 잎 한 장씩을 얹혀놓았어요.
그 즉시 끊긴 조각들이 합쳐지며 뱀이 꿈틀거리더니 다시 되살아났어요. 그러곤 둘 다 서둘러 달아나버렸어요.
잎들은 바닥에 남겨진 체였어요.
이 광경을 지켜본 불행한 남자의 머릿속에 문득 떠오르는 게 있었어요.
중상을 치유할 수 있는 잎의 능력이라면 죽은 사람도 못 살릴 이유가 없었던 거죠.
그래서 젊은이가 잎들을 주워 죽은 아내의 입에 한 장, 두 눈에 각각 한 장씩 얹어보았어요.
그러자마자 즉시 그녀의 혈관들에 피가 돌며 창백하던 얼굴에 붉은 기가 돌며 생기가 돌아오기 시작했어요. 
그때 그녀가 숨을 턱하고 쉬며 두 눈을 뜨며 말했어요.
“아, 세상에, 여긴 어디죠?”
“내 옆이요, 여보.”라며 그가 대답했어요.
젊은이는 어찌된 영문인지 그리고 그녀가 어찌하여 다시 살아나게 된 건지 그녀에게 말해주었어요.
그럼 다음 그는 그녀에게 포도주와 빵을 조금 주었어요. 
그걸 먹은 그녀가 다시 힘을 얻었어요.
그는 그녀를 일으킨 다음 문으로 가 두드리며 큰 소리로 외쳤어요.
그 소리를 보초병들이 듣고 국왕께 보고했어요.
국왕이 직접 와 문을 열어보니 두 사람 모두 건강한 상태로 서 있는 거예요, 그래서 기뻐하며 그들을 안아주었어요. 이로써 슬픔은 끝이 되었어요.
하지만 젊은 왕은 세 장의 뱀 잎을 잘 보관했다가 자신의 ‘심복’(마음으로 믿는 부하)에게 주며 말했어요.
“항상 네가 품고 다니다 언젠가 나를 위해 요긴하게 쓰거라. 누가 알겠느냐, 이게 우릴 살릴지!”
아세요, 되살아난 아내에겐 변화가 하나 있었어요.
되살아난 다음부턴 아내의 심장에서 왠지 그녀의 남편에 대한 사랑이 삭제된 거 같았어요.
어쨌든 시간이 좀 지나자 그는 바다를 건너 항해를 해 늙으신 아버지를 방문해복 싶었어요.
그래서 그들이 배를 타고 가는데, 아내가 남편이 그녀에게 보여주었던 진실하고 숭고한 사랑이 실은 그녀를 되살린 진짜 이유임을 망각하고서, 선장(배의 선장)과 눈이 맞은 거예요. 그야말로 사악한 애정이었죠. 남편이 살아있는데 말이죠.
젊은 왕이 잠든 사이, 그녀는 선장을 방으로 불려들어 자신은 잠든 자의 머리를 잡고 선장은 잠든 자의 발을 잡고서 그를 바다 속에 내던져버렸어요.
정말이지 파렴치하기 거지 없는 짓이었죠.
그녀가 말했어요.
“이게 집으로 돌아가 그가 가는 도중 죽었다 말해야지. 그럼 내가 아바마마께 당신(배의 선장)을 무척 칭찬하는 말을 할 거야, 그럼 아바마마께서 나와 당신을 결혼시켜줄 거고, 그럼 당신이 왕국을 물려받게 되는 거지.”
하지만 이것을 모두 보게 된 ‘젊은이의 심복(충실한 하인)’이 용케도 그들에게 발각되지 않고 배에서 작은 보트 한 척을 내려 주인(젊은 왕)을 찾아 항해했고, 배반자들(아내와 선장)이 가게 내버려두었어요.
결국 심복은 시신 하나를 끌어올릴 수 있었어요.
심복은 항상 품고 다니던 세 장의 뱀 잎의 도움을 구하고조, 시신의 두 눈과 입에 뱀 잎들을 올려놓았어요.
다행히 젊은 왕이 다시 숨을 쉬기 시작했어요.
그들은 필사적으로 밤낮으로 노를 저었어요. 작은 보트가 항해하기에 더 날 세다 보니 그들은 배반자들보다 더 빨리 나이 드신 국왕폐하께 도착할 수 있었어요.
그들만 온 것을 보고 놀란 왕이 도대체 무슨 일이 있었던 건지 물었어요.
자기 딸의 부정이 있었음을 알게 된 왕이 말했어요.
“내 딸이 그런 짓을 했다니 아비로서 도저히 믿기지 않는다, 하지만 진실의 횃불은 곧 밝혀지기 마련이다.”
그러곤 일단 비밀 방에 들어가 모두의 눈으로부터 그들을 숨기고 있어 보라 명했어요.
머지않아 큰 배가 항구에 도착했어요.
사악한 여인이 고생은 혼자 다한 듯한 얼굴을 지으며 아빠 앞에 나타났어요.
왕이 말했어요.
“어인 일로 너만 왔느냐? 네 남편은 어디 있느냐?”
“아, 아빠,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “항해도중, 상부(남편이 죽음을 당함)를 당하게 되어 돌아오게 되었나이다. 남편이 급병에 걸려 죽었어요. 좋은 선장님이 저를 보살펴주지 않았다면 저 또한 병에 걸려 죽었을 거예요. 남편이 죽을 때 선장님도 같이 계셨으니 아빠께 상세히 말씀드릴 수 있어요.”
왕이 말했어요.
“그럼 내가 죽었다는 그를 불러보겠다.”
왕은 침실 문이 열고 두 사람을 나오라 명했어요. 
자신의 남편이 살아 있는 걸 본 여자는 벼락을 맞은 듯 무릎을 꿇고 앉아 자비를 구했어요.
왕이 말했어요.
“자비는 없다. 그는 죽은 너를 되살려주었다. 하지만 너는 오히려 자고 있는 그를 살해했다. 넌 응당 네 응보에 대한 벌을 받으리라.”
그런 다음 그녀는 자신의 ‘공범자’(배의 선장)와 함께 구멍들이 뚫린 배 한 척에 태워져 바다로 보내졌어요.
거기서 그들은 곧 파도 사이에 가라앉아버렸답니다. 


(끝)

동화 「세 장의 뱀 잎」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「세 장의 뱀 잎」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter16.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



17. 백사 (흰 뱀)



아주 아주 옛날에 왕이 한 분 살고 계셨어요.
그 왕은 온 나라에 지혜로 이름을 떨치시는 분이셨어요.
무엇도 그에게서 비겨갈 수 없었는데요, 가장 은밀한 소문조차도 공기가 전해주는 듯 그는 다 알았어요.
하지만 그에겐 이상한 습관이 하나 있었는데요. 매일 저녁식사를 마치고 식탁 위가 깨끗이 치워지고 아무도 없고 나면, 믿음직한 시종(하인) 한 명이 그에게 한 뚜껑이 덮인 접시를 한 접시 더 가지고 와야 하는 거였어요.
하지만 그 접시 안에 뭐가 들었는지는 시종 자신도 몰랐어요. 누구도 알 수 없죠. 왜냐면 왕이 혼자 남을 때까진 절대 그 뚜껑을 열어보지 않았으니까요. 
이렇게 오랜 시간이 지나고, 어느 날 접시를 치우던 그 시종(왕의 심복)이 호기심에 못이겨 그 접시를 살짝쿵 자기 방으로 가지고 갔어요.
시종은 문을 주의 깊게 닫은 다음 접시의 뚜껑을 들어 올려보았어요.
그러자 접시 위에 ‘백사’(몸이 흰 뱀. 백사는 신령한 짐승으로 여겨짐) 한 마리가 놓여있는 게 보였어요.
이쯤 되면 도저히 맛을 안 보곤 참을 수 없죠. 
그래서 시종이 조금만 떼어다가 입에 넣어봤어요.
혀에 닫자마자 창문 밖에서 낯설고 자그마한 목소리들이 소곤소곤 거리는 게 들리는 거예요.
그는 가 엿듣다 그게 참새들이 서로 재잘거리는 소리란 것을 알게 되었어요.
참새들이 들판과 숲에서 본 다양한 종류의 소식들을 서로 주고받으며 대화하는 내용이었어요.
뱀을 먹은 게 그에게 동물들의 언어를 이해할 수 있는 능력을 준 거지 뭐예요.
그런데 우연히도 바로 그날 왕비가 자신이 가장 아끼는 반지를 잃어버렸는데 그걸 훔쳐간 사람으로 왕의 이 충실한 시종(하인)이 의심받은 거예요. 왜냐면 시종은 왕의 심복인지라 어디든 들릴 수 있으니까요.
왕이 이 자를 잡아들이라 명했어요.
왕은 추상같은 불호령을 내리시며 내일 아침까지 이실직고 하지 않음 사형에 처하겠노라고 말했어요.
시종이 자신의 죄 없음을 말씀드렸지만 말을 아예 안 함만 못했어요(소용이 없었어요).
그가 이 문제로 두려움에 떨며 안뜰로 내려가 어찌하면 이 문제를 헤쳐 나올 수 있을지를 생각하고 있는데.
오리 몇 마리가 개울가에 차분하게 앉아선 수다를 떨고 있는 거예요.
오리들은 주둥이로 자기 깃털을 부드럽게 하며 비밀스런 수다를 주고받고 있었어요. 
시종이 서서 엿듣게 되었어요.
오리들은 서로 자신들이 오늘 아침 비틀비틀 여기저기로 거닐었던 장소들 얘기로 시작해, 그 날 먹은 최고의 음식 애기까지 얘기를 주고받고 있었어요.
그때 오리 한 마리가 처량한 목소리로 말했어요.
“내 위에 묵직한 뭐가 들어차 있어. 아침에 허겁지겁 먹다 왕비님 창문 아래에 놓여 있던 반지까지 삼켰나봐. 나 이제 어떡해.”
시종(하인)은 즉시 그 놈의 목을 움켜잡곤 부엌으로 데려가 요리사에게 말했어요.
“이 놈 튼실하지 않소. 자, 죽이시오.”
“좋소.”라며 그 요리사가 손으로 그 오리의 몸무게를 재어보더니 말했어요. 
“거 참 살 한 번 잘 찐 놈이네. 때마침 불에 구워 요리할 놈을 찾던 참인데.”
그리하여 요리사가 그 오리의 목을 삭둑 잘라 내장을 끄집어내자, 왕비님의 반지가 위 안에서 발견이 되었어요.
이리하여 그 시종은 자신의 결백함을 쉽게 증명해보일 수 있었어요.
그래서 왕이 자신의 잘못에 대한 보상을 해주기 위해 시종에게 호의 하나를 해 주겠다 말씀하시며 궁전 내 최고의 직책을 약속하셨어요. 바라는 직책이 있음 말만 하라고요.
시종은 모든 걸 거절했어요. 다만 여행할 말 한 마리와 용돈(여행경비)을 조금 주시면 잠시 세상구경을 하고 올 용의는 있다고 말씀드렸지요. 
말씀드린 게 모두 받아 들이지자, 시종은 여행길을 떠났어요.
하루는 늪에 갔더니, 갈대밭에 갇힌 물고기 세 마리가 목이 말라 입을 뻐금뻐금하고 있는 게 보였다. 
그 물고기들이 벙어리였다 말하는 이도 있겠지만, 그는 물고기들이 이제 비참하게 죽는 걸 한탄하는 소리를 듣고 자비심이 일어 말을 길 한 쪽에 대고 세 마리 죄수들을 들어 물에다 도로 놓아주었다. 
물고기들이 기쁨에 파닥 파닥이며 수면 위로 고개를 내밀며 그에게 소리쳤어요.
“우리를 구해주신 이 은혜는 꼭 기억했다 보답해드릴게요!” 
그가 다시 말에 올라 한 동안 가는데 자신의 발밑 아래에 있는 모래 속에서 누구의 목소리가 들리는 듯 했다. 
그가 가만 들어보니 그건 ’개미 왕‘의 불평소리였다. 
“왜 사람들이 서투른 짐승을 타고 와서 우릴 밟지 못해 안달인 거야? 저 무식한 말 놈의 자식이 지(자신의) 무거운 발굽으로 내 불쌍한 백성들을 무자비하게도 밟고 가는데!” 
그래서 그가 말을 길옆에 딱 붙어서 조심히 가게 하자, ’개미 왕‘이 그에게 큰 소리로 말했어요.
“자넬 기억해 두겠네… 내 언젠가 이 은혜를 꼭 함세!”
그 길은 때마침 숲으로 이어졌어요.
숲에 도착해 보니 나이 들고 큰까마귀 두 마리가 자신들의 둥지 옆에 서서 자신들의 어린 자녀들을 내던지고 있었어요.
“이 게으름뱅이들, 이제 너희들이 알아서 살거라, 아무 짝에도 쓸모없는 것들 같으니라고!”라며 그들(부모 까마귀)이 외쳤어요. “우린 더 이상 너희들을 위해 음식을 찾을 수 없다. 너희도 이제 많이 컸으니 너희 밥은 너희가 알아서 하거라.”
하지만 불쌍한 어린 큰까마귀들은 땅바닥에 바로 누워 자신들의 날개만 파닥이며 이렇게 외칠 뿐이었어요.
“오, 우리 어찌지 우린 그냥 아무 것도 할 수 없는 어린애들인데! 우리보고 먹이를 구하라니요 우린 날지도 못하는 걸! 우리 어째, 여기 있다 굶어죽어?”
그래서 착한 젊은이는 말에서 내려 검을 빼들고서 자신의 말을 죽인 다음 그걸 어린 큰까마귀들에게 먹이로 주었다. 
그러자 그들이 깡충깡충 뛰며 달려와 굶주림을 해결할 수 있었다. 
그들이 소리쳤다. 
“우린 꼭 당신을 기억해둘게요… 착한 사람에게 복이 깃들게요!”
이리하여 그는 이제 자신의 두 발로 걸어야 했어요.
한참을 그렇게 걸어가니 커다란 도시가 나왔어요.
큰 소음과 함께 거리들마다 사람들로 붐비는 곳이었어요.
그때 말 등에 탄 한 남자가 오더이 큰 소리로 외쳤어요.
“공주님이 남편을 찾고 있다. 신청하는 자는 누구든 어려운 임무 하나를 완수해야한다. 만약 성공하지 못하면 목을 베 죽일 것이다.”
벌써 많은 사람들이 이 시도를 해보았지만 모두 헛수고였어요. 
그럼에도 불구하고 우리의 젊은이는 공주님을 보자마자 엄청난 아름다움에 이 모든 위험을 망각하고 왕 앞으로 나아가 자신이 청혼하러 왔다 말하고 말았어요. 
왕은 그를 바다로 앞장서 데리고 가, 황금 반지 하나를 바다 속에 던졌어요. 젊은이가 보는 앞에서 말이죠.
그러더니 왕이 난데없이 방금 자신이 던진 그 반지를 바다 밑바닥에서 다시 가져오라는 거예요. 
그리고 덧붙이길,
“만약 네가 반지를 찾지 못하고 올라오면 네 몸이 파도에 부서질 때까지 내던져지고 또 내던져질 것이다.”
모든 사람들이 이 잘생긴 젊은이가 처한 상황을 몹시 애석해하며 가 버렸고 그리하여 젊은이만 홀로 바닷가에 남게 되었어요.
그가 해안가에 서서 어찌해야할지 생각에 잠겨 있는데, 갑자기 물고기 세 마리가 자기 쪽으로 헤엄쳐오고 있는 게 보이는 거예요.
그들은 젊은이가 예전에 구해준 바로 그 물고기들이었어요.
가운데 있는 물고기가 입에 홍합을 하나 물고 있었어요. 그 물고기가 그 홍합을 해안가에 있는 젊은이의 발 부분에 놓았어요.
그래서 젊은이가 홍합을 집어 들어 열어보니 홍합 껍데기 속에 황금 반지가 들어있는 거예요.
뛸 듯이 기쁜 그가 그걸 왕께 가져가 받쳤어요. 이제 약속하신 공주와의 결혼은 당연지사겠지 하고 엄청 속으로 기대하면서요. 
아 근데 문제가 하나 발생했어요.
공주님은 무척 도도한 분이라 이 젊은이의 출생신분이 자신과 동급이 아닌 걸 알고는 경멸하기 시작한 거죠.
그래서 첫 번째 임무가 끝나자 도리어 두 번째 임무를 완수할 것을 요구했어요.
그녀는 정원으로 가 ‘기장 종자’(기장=잡곡밥. 종자=씨앗. 기장 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/bFDQa1 )로 가득 찬 ‘마대’(커다란 자루) 10개를 손수 다 잔디밭 위에 흩뿌렸어요.
그런 다음 공주가 말했어요.
“자 내일 아침 해 뜰 때까지 이 종자(씨앗)들을 모두 주어 담거라, 한 톨이라도 모자라면 목숨이 두개라도 살아남을 수 없을 줄 알아라.”
젊은이가 정원에 앉아 이 말도 안 되는 임무가 도저히 가능한지 조차 짐작을 못하고 있었어요. 어찌해야 할지 머릿속이 까마득하지 뭐예요.
새벽의 여명(밝음)이 밝아오길 기다리며 자신의 죽음을 하염없이 슬퍼하고 있었지요.
하지만 첫 번째 햇살이 정원 안을 비추자 곧 젊은이 자기 옆에 나란히 쌓인 10포대기의 포대가 보았지 뭐예요. 모두 꽉꽉 다 채워진 포대였어요. 한 톨도 남긴 없이요.
‘개미 왕’이 밤에 수천의 개미와 또 수천의 개미를 데리고 와 ‘기장 종자’(잡곡 씨앗)를 죄다 주어 포대 속에 담은 거지요. 이건 근면성실한 개미들이었기에 가능한 것이었어요.  
곧 공주님이 몸소 정원으로 내려왔다가 이 젊은이가 자신이 준 임무를 완수한 걸 보고 화들짝 놀랐어요.
하지만 이 정도로 그녀의 도도함이 무너질 리가 없었죠.
그래서 공주는 정신을 가다듬고 이렇게 말했어요.
“네가 비록 두 임무를 완수했을지라도, ‘생명의 나무’에서 사과를 따 올 때까진 내 남편으로 받아줄 수 없다.”
‘생명의 나무’라니요? 젊은이는 ‘생명의 나무’가 어디 있는 나무인지도 모르는 걸요. 
그래도 그는 출발했어요. 가고 또 갔죠. 자신의 다리가 옮기는 대로 갔다는 표현이 더 낫겠네요. 정말이지 이번 임무는 어쩔 수 없는 건가요.
그렇게 젊은이가 세 개의 왕국을 방랑한 다음, 저녁 무렵 어느 숲에 도착해 나무 아래 누워 자려고 하는데.
나뭇가지들이 바스락 거리는 소리가 한 번 나는 것 같더니 “뚝!”하고 황금사과 하나가 자신의 손으로 쏙 떨어지는 거예요.
동시에 큰까마귀 세 마리가 날개를 푸드덕 휘저으며 그의 무릎 위에 내려앉았어요.
그들이 말했지요.
“저희들이 굶어 죽는 걸 살려 주신 분이 당신이세요. 우린 그때 그 어린 큰까마귀들이고요. 이제 우리들도 어른이 되었답니다. 당신이 황금 사과를 찾는단 얘기를 들었어요. 그래서 ‘생명의 나무’가 있는 바다 건너 땅 끝자락까지 날아가 당신을 위해 사과를 따온 거예요.”
뛸 듯이 기쁜 그 젊은이는 집으로 즉시 출발해 그 황금 사과를 아름다운 공주님께 받쳤어요.
이로서 도도한 공주로서도 더는 핑계될 거리가 없게 되고 말았어요.
그들은 그 ‘생명의 사과’를 두 조각으로 나눠 함께 먹었어요.
그러자 공주님의 마음속에 그에 대한 사랑이 가득 채워졌어요.
그래서 그들은 더할 나위 없는 행복을 누리며 오래오래 알콩달콩 살았답니다.


(끝)

동화 「백사」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「백사」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter17.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



18. 지푸라기, 숯, 콩



옛날 어느 마을에 가난한 노파가 한 명 살고 있었어요.
그녀는 접시에 콩들을 담아다 요리를 해 먹고 싶었어요.
그래서 불을 활활 피운 다음 재빨리 콩을 구우려고 했어요.
그녀가 짚 한 단을 가져가 불을 붙였어요.
그녀가 납작한 냄비에 콩들을 담을 때, 콩 하나가 그녀의 감시를 살며시 피해 톡 하고 바닥으로 떨어졌어요.
콩은 들키지 않으려고 얌전히 지푸라기 하나 옆에 납작 엎드려있었어요.
이내 곧 불타는 ‘숯’(나무를 불에 구운 검은 덩어리) 하나가 화로(=불)에서 뛰어내려 그들 둘(지푸라기와 콩) 옆에 톡하고 떨어졌어요.
그때 지푸라기가 이렇게 말하기 시작했어요.
“친구들아, 우리 여길 떠자 응?”
숯이 대답했어요.
“내가 정말이지 운이 좋아 저 화로에서 뛰어내릴 수 있었지, 하마터면 화염에 휩싸여 시체로 변하고 말았을 거야… 그랬다면 아마 재로 변했겠지.”
콩이 말했어요.
“나야 말로 다치지 않고 탈출했다지만, 저 할망구가 나를 다시 냄비에 넣으면 난 아마 ‘꽥!’하는 비명 소리 한 번 제대로 못 질러보고 묽은 죽으로 변했겠지, 내 동료들처럼.”
“나라고 뭐 나은 줄 알아?”라며 지푸라기가 말했어요. “저 노인네가 내 혈육들을 죄다 불과 연기 속에 쳐 넣었는걸. 그것도 한꺼번에 60명 씩 말이야. 난 운 좋게도 그녀의 손가락 사이에서 미끄러져서 간신히 탈출할 수 있었던 거야.”
“그럼 이제 어쩌지?”라며 숯이 말했어요.
“내 생각엔,”라며 콩이 대답했어요. “일단 우리 모두 구사일생으로 죽음에서 벗어났으니, 이제 좋은 친구가 되자, 그리고 여기 있단 어떤 봉변을 더 당할지 모르니 일단 함께 달아나자, 외국으로 가 신세(운)를 바꿀 수도 있겠고 말이야.” 
다른 두 명도 그 제안에 찬성했다.
그리하여 그들 셋은 친구가 되어 길을 떠났다.
하지만 곧 그들은 작은 개울가에 다다르게 되었다. 
거기엔 다리나 발판으로 쓸 나무판자 같은 게 전혀 없었다.
어떻게 이 개울을 건널지 그들이 알지 못하고 있는데. 
지푸라기에게 기가 막힌 아이디어 하나가 떠올랐다. 
지푸라기가 말했다 .
“내가 저 개울에 똑바로 누워볼게. 그럼 너희가 나를 다리처럼 밟고 지나갈 수 있을 거야.”
그리하여 지푸라기가 이쪽 기슭(경사면)에서 저쪽 기슭까지 똑바로 누웠다.
그러자 성질 급한 숯이 새로 완공된 다리(지푸라기) 위를 꽤 대담하게 밟고 지나갔다. 
하지만 그녀(=숯)가 한 가운데에 왔을 때 그만 자신의 발밑에서 “촬! 촬!” 급속도로 지나가는 물소리를 듣고 말았다. 
결국 겁을 집어먹은 숯의 몸이 경직되어 한 발자국도 더 디딜 수 없게 되고 말았다. 
상황이 이리되지 아무리 지푸라기라도 타지 않고는 배길 수 없었다. 
곧 지푸라기 가운데 부분이 타 지푸라기의 몸이 두 동강이 나 개울 속에 “퍽!”하고 빠지고 말았다. 
그 바람에 숯 양마저 미끄러져 “쉿!” 소리를 내며 물속에 “첨벙!”하고 빠져 생을 마치고 말았다. 
개울의 기슭(경사면)에 신중하게 서 있던 콩은 이 사단을 보고 “깔깔깔!”라며 웃지 않을 수가 없었다. 
콩 양은 너무도 웃긴 나머지 웃음을 멈출 수가 없게 되었다. 그 바람에 너무 웃다 그만 “퍽!”하고 배(콩의 배 부분)가 터지고 말았다.  
이리하여 그녀도 앞서 두 친구들처럼 불시의 사고로 생을 마감하는 듯 보였다. 
그때 다행스럽게도 일자리를 구하러 돌아다니고 있던 ‘재봉사’(옷을 만드는 사람)가 개울가에 쉬려고 앉았다.
그 재봉사는 동정심이 많은 사람이었던지라 곧 자신의 바늘과 실을 꺼내 콩 ‘양’(=여자)의 배를 실로 꿰매주었다. 
콩 양은 얌전하게 그에게 감사인사를 드렸다. 
하지만 그 재봉사가 검은 실을 사용했기 때문에, 그 이후부터 모든 콩의 배에는 검은 ‘실밥’(꿰맨 실이 밖으로 드러난 부분. 실밥이 있는 콩 ? 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/fpQVJE ) 하나가 생기게 되었다.


(끝)

동화 「지푸라기, 숯, 콩」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「지푸라기, 숯, 콩」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter18.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



19. 어부와 아내



옛날 옛적에 바닷가 옆에서 다 쓰러져가는 오두막집에 자신의 아내와 사는 어부가 한 명 있었어요.
그는 매일 나가 낚시질로 먹고 살았답니다.
한번은 낚싯대를 드리우고 앉아 맑은 물만 바라보고 있는데, 낚싯줄이 갑자기 푹 가라앉으며 막 아래로 내려가는 거예요, 그래서 옳거니 하고서 어부가 낚싯줄을 끌어올리자 큰 ‘넙치’(몸이 넓적한 바닷물고기) 한 마리가 끌려나왔어요.
그때 그 넙치가 어부에게 말했어요.
“어부님, 부디, 비나이니, 저를 놓아주세요. 저는 진짜 넙치가 아니라 마법에 걸린 왕자예요. 그런 저를 죽여서 뭐에 쓰겠어요? 저는 드시기에 맛있지도 않으니 그냥 다시 물에 놓아주세요, 저를 가게 해주세용.”
“그래 가거라,”라며 그 어부가 말했어요. “긴 말 할 필요도 없다… 말을 하는 물고기라면 그냥 놓아줘야지, 암.”
그는 넙치를 다시 맑은 바닷물에 되돌려 보내주었어요.
넙치는 자신의 뒤로 긴 핏줄기 하나를 남기며 바닥으로 갔어요.
그런 다음 어부는 자리를 털고 일어나 자신의 아내가 있는 오두막집으로 돌아왔어요.
“당신,”라며 여자가 말했어요. “오늘은 뭐 잡은 거 없어요?”
“응,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “넙치 한 마릴 잡긴 했는데, 자기가 마법에 걸린 왕자라고 해서, 내가 놓아주었어.”
“소원 뭐 안 말했어요?”라며 여자가 말했어요.
“안 했는데,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “소원을 빌어야하는 거야?”
“아이고 답답아,”라며 여자가 말했어요. “이 더러운 오두막집에 사는 게 지겹지도 않아요. 우리를 부부를 위해 작고 아담한 집 한 채 빌어보는 게 뭐 대순감(대수인 건감). 다시 가 그(넙치)를 불러서, 작고 아담한 집 한 채만 달라고 말해 봐요, 확실히 줄지 누가 알아요.” 
“아,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “굳이 또 거길 나보고 가라고?”
“아이참,”라며 그 여자가 말했어요. “당신이 잡은 건 분명하잖아요, 그리고 놓아주었고요. 그러니 꼭 들어줄 거예요. 얼른 가 봐요.”
남자는 전혀 내키지가 않았지만 그래도 아내의 말을 거역하기 싫어 바닷가로 가보았어요.
남자가 거기 가 보니, 바다는 더 이상 예전처럼 반들반들하지 않고, 온통 초록색과 노랑 색이였어요.
남자가 가만히 선 채로 말했어요.
“넙치야, 바다에 사는 넙치야, 부디, 이리로 좀 와주련. 내 착한 아내 ‘일사빌’(아내이름)의 뜻은 내 생각과는 좀 다르더구나.”
그러자 그 넙치가 팔랑팔랑 헤엄치며 그에게로 다가와 말했어요.
“그럼 아내 되시는 분이 뭘 원하던데요?”
“아,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “내가 널 잡았다고 하니, 내 아내 말론, 응당 네가 뭘 좀 해줘야 하는 거 아닌가 하더라. 다 쓰러져가는 오두막집에서 더 이상 살기 싫데, 내 아내는. 아담한 집 한 채면 되겠는데.”
“가 보세요.”라며 그 넙치가 말했어요. “그녀가 벌써 가지셨을 거예요.”
그래서 남자가 집에 돌아와 보니, 아내는 더 이상 오두막집에 있지 않았어요.
오두막집 대신 작고 아담한 집 한 채가 서 있는데, 아내는 그 집 앞에 있는 긴 의자(벤치)에 앉아 있었어요.
아내가 남편의 손을 잡아끌며 말했어요.
“안으로 들어가 봐요, 이 집 참 근사하지 않아요?”
그래서 그들은 들어갔다. 작은 ‘포치’(지붕과 기둥만 있고 벽이 뚫린 현관)가 있고 아담하고 예쁜 응접실과 침실이 각각 하나씩 있고 부엌과 식료품저장실이 하나씩 있는 집이었다. 찬장(그릇 넣는 곳)도 모두 고급이었으며 주석(=양철)과 놋(=황동)으로 만든 아름다운 그릇들이 채워져 있었다. 누구든 탐낼 만했다. 
아담한 그 집 뒤에는 작은 마당이 있는데, 암탉들과 오리들이 있고, 꽃들과 과일이 달린 작은 정원도 있었다. 
“봐요,”라며 아내가 말했다. “넘 멋지지 않아요!”
“그러네,”라며 남편이 말했다. “우리가 항상 꿈꾸어오던 곳인걸…. 이제 만족하며 삽시다.”
“그건 좀 더 생각해보고요.”라며 아내가 말했다. 
그들은 뭘 좀 먹은 다음 침대로 가 누었다.
모든 것이 그렇게 만족스럽게 1주일 내지는 2주일간 이어졌다. 
그러자 여자가 말했다. 
“들어봐요, 여보, 이 집은 우리 부부가 살기엔 너무 작아요. 정원도 작고 마당도 작고. 넙치한테 다시 가서 커다란 집을 달라고 해 보세요. 그러니까 돌로 지어진 큰 성을 달라고 해보세요. 나 성에 살고 싶어 여보. 어서 넙치에게 가 봐요. 우리에게 성을 달라고 해봐요.”
“아, 여보,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “이 집도 아담하고 충분히 좋은데 뭘 또 바라고 그래. 우리가 성에 산다니 그게 말이나 돼?”
“아이참!”라며 그 여자가 말했어요. “일단 거길 가보라니까요. 넙치라면 해줄 거예요.”
“아니, 여보,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “넙치가 이미 우리에게 아담한 집 한 채를 주었잖소. 그리고 이리 빨리 또 가서 다른 걸 바라면 그도 화를 낼 게 분명하잖소.”
“가요,”라며 여자가 말했어요. “그라면 아주 쉽게 할 수 있어요. 기쁘게 해줄 거예요. 당신은 그냥 그에게 가보기만 하면 되잖아요.” 
남자의 마음이 무거워졌어요. 
아무래도 가면 안 될 거 같았거든요.
그가 속으로 말했어요.
“이건 아닌데.”
그럼에도 그는 갔어요.
그가 바다에 도착해보니 물은 이제 자줏빛과 짙은 파랑색이 되어 있고 어두컴컴하고 흐려있었어요. 더 이상 예전처럼 초록색에다가 노란 색이 아니었어요. 하지만 아직은 잔잔한 바다였어요.
그래서 남작 거기 서서 말했어요….
“넙치야, 바다에 사는 넙치야, 부디, 이리로 좀 와주련. 내 착한 아내 ‘일사빌’(아내이름)의 뜻은 내 생각과는 좀 다르더구나.” 
“그래요, 그럼, 그녀가 뭘 원하든가요?”라며 그 넙치가 말했어요.
“아아,”라며 남자가 반쯤은 겁을 먹으며 말했어요. “돌로 지어진 큰 성에 살고 싶다는 구나.”
“가 보세요, 그녀가 문 앞에 서 있을 거예요.”라고 그 넙치가 말했어요.
그런 다음 남자는 자리를 떠 집으로 향했어요.
집에 도착한 남자는 큰 돌 궁전을 발견했어요. 그의 아내가 막 계단을 밟고 들어가려고 서 있었어요.
그녀가 남편의 손을 잡아끌며 말했어요.
“들어가 봅시다.”
그래서 그는 아내와 함께 들어갔어요.
그 성엔 대리석으로 마감된(겉에 붙인) 큰 홀과 많은 하인들이 있었어요. 하인들이 문들을 활짝 활짝 열어주었어요.
벽들엔 온통 아름다운 벽지들이 화사하게 발라져 있었고요, 방들엔 순금으로 된 의자들과 탁자들과 함께 수정으로 된 ‘샹들리에’(호화로운 장식용 전등)들 이 천정에 매달려 있었어요. 그리고 모든 방들과 침실엔 양탄자가 깔려 있었고요, 모든 탁자들 위엔 최고급 먹을 것과 포도주가 들어 있어, 보는 이로 하여금 탄식이 절로 나오게 하지 뭐예요.
또한 집 뒤엔 커다란 마당이 하나 있는데, 말과 소들이 사는 마구간도 있었고요, 최고급 마차들이 있었어요. 훌륭하고 큰 정원도 있었는데요, 거기에 아름다운 꽃들과 과일나무들이 가득했어요. 그리고 대략 1킬로미터 길이는 되는 듯한 자연공원엔요 수사슴 암사슴 산토끼들이 살고 있었어요. 모든 게 아내가 꿈꿔온 그대로였어요.
“어서요,”라며 그 여자가 말했어요. “아름답지 않아요?”
“정말, 그래,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “허허 참, 우리가 정말로 이런 아름다운 성에 살게 되다니. 이제 만족하는 거지 여보?”
“그건 좀 더 생각해보자고요,”라며 여자가 말했어요. “일단 자고요.”
그래서 그들은 침대로 가 잠이 들었어요.
다음 날 아침 아내가 먼저 잠에서 깨었어요. 마침 새벽의 여명(빛줄기)이 밝아오려던 찰나였어요. 침대에서 일어난 그녀가 자신 앞에 펼쳐진 더없이 아름다운 시골 풍경을 보았어요.
남편은 아직 뻗어 자고 있는 중이었어요.
그래서 아내는 자신의 팔꿈치로 남편의 옆구리를 콕 찌르며 말했어요.
“일어나 봐요, 여보, 창문 좀 봐 봐요. 보세요, 우리가 저 땅 모두의 왕이 되면 안 될까요? 넙치에게 가서, 우리보고 왕이 되게 해 달라고 하세요.”
“아, 당신,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “아니 왕은 또 왜? 난 왕이 되고 싶지 않아.”
“아이고 참,”라며 그의 아내가 말했어요. “누가 당신보고 왕이 되래, 내가 되겠해달라고. 어서 넙치에게 가 봐요, 가서 나를 왕으로 만들어주세요.”
“아, 여보,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “왕이 돼서 뭐하게? 난 왠지 그(넙치)에게 그런 말을 하면 안 될 거 같아서야.”
“왜 안 되는데 응?”라며 여자가 말했어요. “당장 가지 못해. 난 왕이 되어야 겠어, 어!”
그래서 남자가 갔어요. 아내가 왕이 되겠다고 우겨 남자의 마음이 참담하기 거지 없었어요.
‘이건 아닌 거 같은데. 이게 아닌데.’라며 그는 생각했어요.
그는 정말 가고 싶지 않았어요, 하지만 걷다 보니 도착해 있었죠.
바다에 도착해 보니, 바다는 아주 짙은 회색이고, 파도가 위 아래로 넘실되었고, 냄새도 부패한 냄새가 났어요.
그때 남자가 바닷가 옆으로 가 서서 말했어요.
“넙치야, 바다에 사는 넙치야, 부디, 이리로 좀 와주련. 내 착한 아내 ‘일사빌’(아내이름)의 뜻은 내 생각과는 좀 다르더구나.”
“그럼, 그녀가 뭘 원하든가요?”라며 그 넙치가 말했어요. 
“아아,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “아 글쎄 내 마누라가 왕이 되고 싶대.”
“그녀에게 가 보세요, 그녀는 벌써 왕이 되어 있을 거예요.”
그래서 남자가 가, 궁전에 도착해 보니, 예전의 성은 이제 더 웅장한 궁전이 되어 있고, 거대한 탑도 하나 솟아 있고 웅장한 장식들이 장난이 아니었어요.
보초병들이 문 옆에 서 있고요, ‘케틀드럼’(솥 모양의 큰 북)과 트럼펫을 가진 수많은 병사들도 있었어요.
그가 집 안으로 들어가니 이런 세상에 모든 게 진짜 대리석과 진짜 금이었어요. 벨벳(짧고 고운 털이 촘촘히 심어진 물건) 덮개와 장식용 금‘술’(옷에 다는 실)들로 덮인 진짜 대리석과 금 말이에요.
홀(대강당)로 통하는 문들이 열리자, 장엄한 궁정(왕이 거처하는 집)이 보이고, 금과 다이아몬드로 만들어진 높은 왕좌(왕의 의자) 위에 그의 마누라가 앉아 있었어요. 그녀는 머리에 큼직한 황금 왕관을 쓰고 있고, 손엔 순금과 보석들로 만들어진 ‘홀’(왕권을 상징하는 손 막대기. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/QyRjIW )을 쥐고 있었어요. 그녀의 양 옆으론 키가 작은 시녀로 시작해 키가 큰 시녀까지 줄줄이 서서 지시를 기다리고 있었어요.
그때 남자가 가 그녀 앞에 서며 말했어요.
“아, 마누라, 당신 이제 정말 왕인 거야.”
“그럼요,”라며 여자가 말했어요. “난 이제 왕이에요.”
그래서 그가 서서 그녀를 바라보았어요. 남자는 이런 식으로 한참을 자기 아내를 쳐다보고 나더니 말했어요.
“이제 정말 당신이 왕이니, 우리 이제 이거라도 만족하고 삽시다.”
“아니, 여보,”라며 그 여자가 앙칼지게 말했어요. “세월은 덧없는 거야. 그러니 나도 더는 못 참겠어. 당장 그 넙치에게 가서… 나를 왕이 아니라 황제로 만들어 주라 그래, 어서.”
“원 세상에, 당신, 정말 황제가 되고 싶은 거야?”
“여보,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “넙치에게 가보기나 해. 난 황제가 될 테야.”
“아아, 여보,”라며 그 남자가 말했어요. “넙치(남자)도 그건 못해. 부탁을 이렇게 많이 했는데 무슨 염치로 또 소원을 빌어. 이 땅에 황제는 한 분이면 족해. 넙치도 당신을 그런 황제로 만들 수 없다고! 내 확신하건데, 이번만은 참아 여보.”
“뭬야(뭐야)!”라며 그 여자가 말했어요. “왕은 나야. 당신은 내 남편일 뿐이고. 그러니 당장 가지 못해? 당장 가라고! 그(넙치)가 나를 왕으로 만들었음 이번엔 황제로 만드는 건 식은 죽 먹기라고. 난 황제가 될 테야 그러니 당장 가봐.”
남자는 반강제적으로 출발했어요.
하지만 발걸음을 디디는 그의 마음은 정말이지 천근만근이었어요. 
그가 속으로 생각했어요.
“끝이 좋을 리 없어. 끝이 좋을 리 없다고! 황제라니 이런 ‘후안무치한’(뻔뻔한) 경우가! 넙치가 진절머리를 칠 텐데.”
남자가 바다에 도착해보니, 바닷물은 더 검어지고 탁해져 있었어요. 그리고 바다 밑바닥에서 위까지 부글부글 끓어 거품들이 마구 일고(생기고) 있었고요. 바람은 또 어찌나 매섭게도 부는지 심장이 아찔할 정도였어요.
남자는 두려웠어요.
그래도 가 바닷가옆에 서며 말했어요.
“넙치야, 바다에 사는 넙치야, 부디, 이리로 좀 와주련. 내 착한 아내 ‘일사빌’(아내이름)의 뜻은 내 생각과는 좀 다르더구나.”
“그러세요, 그럼 그녀가 무얼 원하던가요?”라며 그 넙치가 말했어요. 
“아아, 넙치야,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “내 마누가 글쎄 황제가 되고 싶데.”
“그녀에게 가 보세요,”라며 넙치가 말했어요. “그녀는 벌써 황제세요.”
그래서 남자가 가 거길 도착해보니, 온 궁전이 반짝이는 대리석으로 ‘마감’(겉에 붙임)되어 있고 실제 같은 석고 조각상들과 황금 장식물들이 여기저기서 반짝반짝거리고 있었어요.
트럼펫을 불고 ‘심벌즈’(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/IVmF5Y )를 쨍쨍거리고 드럼을 쿵쾅쿵쾅 치면서 병사들이 문 앞을 지나가고 있었고요, 궁전 안에는 남작(5번째 귀족작위. 제일 낮은 귀족작위임)들과 백작(세 번째로 높은 귀족작위)들과 공작(첫 번째로 높은 귀족작위)들이 하인들 마냥 주변에서 대기하고 있었어요.
사람들이 남자에게 순금으로 된 문들을 열어주었어요.
그가 들어가 보니, 마누라는 이제 금 한 덩어리로 만든 아주 높은 왕자(의자)에 앉아 있었어요. 왕자(의자)가 어찌나 높은지 마치 3킬로미터는 되어 보였어요.
그녀의 황금 왕관은 또 어찌나 크고 높은지 높이가 3미터는 되어 보였고요, 그녀가 한 손에 쥐고 있던 ‘홀’(왕권을 상징하는 손 막대기)과 반대쪽 손에 쥐고 있던 ‘황제의 보주’(왕권상징. 원형 구 위에 십자가. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/lY8VYc )엔 다이아몬드들과 홍옥(보석)이 가득했어요.
그녀의 양쪽 편으로는 황실 근위병들이 두 줄로 쫙 늘어서 있었고요, 근위병들은 키 순서대로 작은 순서부터 큰 순서로 서 있었어요.
남자의 앞에 있는 근위병은 어찌나 키가 커든지 가장 작은 난쟁이보다 마치 3킬로미터는 더 커보였어요. 난쟁이가 마치 새끼손가락 정도로 보인 달까요. 
앞줄엔 수많은 왕자들과 공작(귀족)들이 서 있었어요.
그때 남자가 들어가 그들 사이에 서며 말했어요.
“여보, 당신 진짜 황제야?”
“응,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “나 이제 진짜 황제야.”
그러자 남자가 서서 그녀를 찬찬히 들여다보았어요. 한동안 그녀만 바라보고 있던 남자가 말했어요.
“아, 여보, 이젠 황제인 거에 만족해야 돼.”
“여보,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “거기 왜 서 있어(자기 옆 자리로 오라는 뜻임)? 난 이제 황제야. 하지만 교황은 아닌걸. 넙치에게 가봐.”
“아아, 여보 마누라,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “도대체 또 뭘 더 바라는 거야? 당신은 교황이 될 수 없어. 기독교국가 전체에 그 분은 한 분뿐이시라고. 넙치도 당신을 교황으로 만들 순 없어요.”
“여보,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “난 교황이 될 테야. 즉시 가봐. 난 오늘 당장 교황이 돼야겠으니 까.”
“안 돼, 여보,”라며 그 남자가 말했어요. “그런 말은 나도 차마 넙치에게 못해. 그럼 안 된다고. 너무 과분하잖아. 넙치도 당신을 교황으로는 못 만든다고.”
“여보,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “그 무슨 막말이야! 황제를 만들 수 있는데 왜 교황을 못 만들어. 당장 그에게 가봐. 나는 황제야 당신은 고작 내 남편에 지나지 않아. 그러니 당장 가지 못해?”
남자는 가긴 갔지만 이번엔 너무도 두려워져 거의 실신하기 일보 직전이었어요.
두려움으로 그의 두 어깨가 사시나무 떨리듯 떨리고 무릎이 와들와들 거렸어요.
차디찬 강풍이 육지위로 불어오고 있었고, 구름들이 힘없이 날리고 있었어요. 저녁이 가까워짐에 따라 사방 모든 것들이 어두워져 갔고, 나무들에선 잎들이 떨어졌어요.
바닷물은 이제 부글부글 끓다 못해 솟구치고 요동치며 당장에라도 해안을 삼킬 기세였어요.
저 멀리에선 거친 파도들에 내던져지고 뒤집혀지는 불쌍한 선박들이 간절한 도움을 요하며 신호탄(쏘면 하늘에서 빵하고 환하게 터짐)들을 쏘아올리고 있었어요.
그럼에도 불구하고 아직까지는 하늘 한 가운데에 작지만 푸르고 맑은 한 부분이 남아 있었다. 비록 그 부분만 제외하고 사방의 하늘이 온통 묵직한 폭풍우로 새빨개져 있었지만 말이다. 
밀려드는 절망감과 두려움에 간신히 서선 그가 말했다. 
“넙치야, 바다에 사는 넙치야, 부디, 이리로 좀 와주련. 왜냐면 내 착한 아내 ‘일사빌’(아내이름)의 뜻은 내 생각과는 좀 달라서 말이야.”
“그럼, 그녀가 무얼 바라던가요?”라며 그 넙치가 말했어요. 
“아아,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “마누라는 교황님이 되고 싶어 해.”
“그럼 가보세요,”라며 넙치가 말했어요. “그녀는 이미 교황님이세요.”
그래서 그가 가 거길 도착해보니, 큼직한 교회 주변으로 궁전들이 수북이 둘러싸 있었어요.
군중들(사람들) 틈을 뚫고서 간신히 남자가 안으로 들어가 보니, 수천 개 그리고 또 수천 개의 촛불들이 안을 환하게 비추고 있었어요.
그의 아내는 황금 의상을 걸치고서 지금까지보다 훨씬 더 높은 왕자(의자) 위에 앉아 있었어요.
그녀의 머리 위에는 커다란 황금 왕관 세 개가 올려져 있었고요. 그녀 주변으로 교회의 장려함이 이루 말로 표현할 수 없을 정도였어요.
그녀 양쪽 편으로는 정말이지 가장 높은 탑만큼이나 높은 촛불들부터 시작해 이 세상에서 가장 키가 작은 촛불들까지 순서대로 줄지어 서 있었어요.
그리고 모든 황제들과 왕들이 그녀 앞에 무릎을 꿇고 앉아 그녀의 신발에 입을 맞추고 있었어요. 
“여보 마누라,”라며 남자가 그녀를 조심스레 쳐다보더니 말했어요. “당신 진짜 교황님이네?”
“응,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “난 교황님이야.”
그래서 남편은 서서 그녀를 쳐다보았지요. 남자는 정말이자 그녀를 쳐다보는 게 환히 빛나는 태양을 바라보는 것 같이 느껴졌어요.
그는 한 동안 그녀가 하는 걸 지켜보며 서 있었어요.
그때 그가 다시 말했어요.
“아, 여보, 이제 교황님도 됐으니, 이제 만족하는 거지!”
하지만 그녀가 마치 기둥만큼이나 뻣뻣한 표정을 지으며 어떤 몸짓도 눈짓도 하지 않았기에, 남편이 다시 말했어요.
“여보, 이제 당신도 교황님이 되고 했으니, 우리 이제 만족하자 응, 이 이상은 더 높은 게 없어요.”
“그건 좀 더 생각해보고,”라며 그 여자가 말했어요. 
그런 까닭에 그들 부부가 잠자리에 들었을 때, 그녀는 만족할 수 없었어요. 탐욕이 그녀를 잠들게 놓아두지 않았기 때문이죠. 왜냐면 그녀는 이제 또 뭐가 될지를 끊임없이 생각해보고 또 생각해보며 스스로를 지치게 하고 있었기 때문이에요.
반면 남편은 아주 푹 잘 잤어요. 왜냐면 그 날 하루 동안 집에서 바닷가까지 여러 번을 걷고 또 걸어 고된 하루를 보냈으니까요.
하지만 아내는 전혀 잠이 오지 않는 걸요. 온 밤을 이쪽으로 누웠다 저쪽으로 누웠다만 반복했어요. 이제 뭐가 되게 해 달라 빌까, 이 생각만 하면서요. 하지만 아무리 생각해봐도 교황님보다 높은 건 생각나지 않는 거예요.
결국 태양이 다시 떠오르기 시작했어요. 
그때 여자는 새벽의 새빨간 빛줄기를 보며 침대에 앉아 있었지요.
창문을 통해 떠오르는 태양을 바라보고 있던 그녀가 말했어요.
“해와 달을 뜨고 지게 지시를 내릴 순 없을까?”
“여보 당신,”라며 그녀가 자신의 팔꿈치로 남편의 갈비뼈를 콕콕 찌르며 말했어요.
“일어나 봐요! 넙치한테 가서, 제가 신이 되게 해달라고 말하고 오세요.”
남자는 아직 반쯤 잠이 들 깬 상태였어요. 하지만 잠결에 들은 소리가 너무도 불경해 그는 깜짝 놀라며 침대에서 굴러 떨어지고 말았어요.
남자는 자신이 꿈결에 불경한 말을 들었다 생각하며 두 눈을 비비며 말했어요.
“아아, 여보, 당신 뭐라 그런 거야?”
“여보,”라며 여자가 말했어요. “내가 만약 해와 달에게 떠오르라 져라 할 순 없을까, 해와 달이 떠오르고 지는 걸 바라보고 싶은 걸. 아 못 참겠어. 한 시가 급해, 내 손으로 저들을 뜨고 지게 하지 못하면 한 시도 행복하지 않을 거 같아.”
그 말을 하는 아내의 표정이 너무도 표독스러웠기 때문에 남편은 섬뜩했어요.
아내가 말했어요.
“당장 가, 난 신이 되고 싶어.”
“아아, 여보 마누라,”라며 남자가 그녀 앞에 두 무릎을 꿇고 앉으며 말했어요.
“넙치도 그건 못해. 그가 사람을 황제로 교황님으로 만들어줄 순 있어도 그건 안 된다고. 그리고 여보 내 맹세코 말하는데 제발 교황님이 된 걸로 만족하고 살면 안 될까, 응.” 
그러자 그녀에게서 불호령이 떨어졌어요.
이제 그녀의 머리카락들이 모두 주뼛주뼛 서며 그녀가 길길이 소리를 질려댔어요. 
“더는 못 참아, 당장 가, 안가, 내가 죽는 꼴을 보고 싶은 거예요, 당장 가라고!”
그래서 남자는 바지를 주어입고서 미친 사람처럼 도망쳤어요. 
하지만 밖은 거대한 폭풍우가 미친 듯 날뛰고 있었고 세찬 강풍에 그는 도저히 두 발을 디디고 서 있을 수가 없었어요.
집들과 나무들이 뿌리채 뽑혔고, 산들이 무너져 내려 바위들이 데굴데굴 바다로 구르고 있었어요. 하늘은 이제 온통 검은색이었어요. 천둥소리가 들리고 번개가 치고 있었지요.
교회의 탑이나 산만큼이나 높은 검은 파도들이 들이 닫치고 있었어요.
파도들의 최고꼭대기 위엔 새하얀 거품덩어리들이 일고(생기고) 있었어요. 
남자가 소리 질러 봤지만 도무지 자기 자신의 목소리조차 들을 수 없을 정도였어요.
“넙치야, 바다에 사는 넙치야, 부디, 이리로 좀 와주련. 왜냐면 내 착한 아내 ‘일사빌’(아내이름)의 뜻은 내 생각과는 좀 달라서 말이야.”
“그럼 그녀가 원하는 게 뭐든가요?”라며 그 넙치가 말했어요. 
“아아,”라며 그가 말했어요. “내 마누라는 하느님처럼 되길 원해.”
“그녀에게 가 보세요, 당신은 그녀가 예전의 다 쓰러져 가던 그 오두막집으로 돌아온 걸 발견하시게 될 거예요.”
그리하여 그들 부부는 지금 이 순간까지도 거기 오두막집에서 살고 있답니다.


(끝)

동화 「어부와 아내」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「어부와 아내」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter19.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



20. 용감한 꼬마 재봉사



푹푹 찌는 여름날 아침에 우리의 꼬마 재봉사(옷 만드는 사람)가 창가 옆 자신의 책상에 앉아 무척이나 기분 좋게 바느질을 하고 있었어요.
그때 시골뜨기 아주머니 한 분이 “싸고 맛있는 잽 있어요! 싸고 맛있는 잼이에요!”라며 소리 지르며 거리를 내려가고 계셨어요.
그 울림이 어찌나 경쾌하던지 재봉사의 귀가 반짝했어요.
그가 고운 머리를 창밖으로 내밀며 소리쳤지요. 
“여기요, 아주머니, 여기요, 죄다 사 드릴게요.”
아줌마는 그 무거운 바구니를 이고(들고) 재봉사가 있는 3층까지 끙끙 올라왔어요.
재봉사는 마치 다 살 모양인지 아주머니에게 바구니 속의 항아리들을 다 열게 했어요.
재봉사는 그것 모두를 찬찬히 들여다보고 손으로 들어도 보고 또 코에다가 대고 킁킁 냄새맡아보기도 했어요. 
그러다 결국 말했어요.
“냄새 좋은 잼이네요, 100그램(g)만 주세요, 아줌마, 1/10(십 분의 일) 킬로그램이요 물론 이게 중요한 건 아니지만요.”
장사 한 밑천 땡길 거라 생각했던 아주머니는 이 꼬마 재봉사의 말 같지도 않은 말에 크게 화가 나서 100그램을 주곤 매우 궁시렁 거리며 가버렸어요.
“자, 일용할 양식을 주셔서 감사합니다, 하느님.”라며 그 꼬마 재봉사가 소리쳤어요. “그러니 이걸 먹고 제가 건강해지고 강해지게 해주세요.”
그래서 그는 찬장(그릇을 두는 곳)에서 빵을 꺼내와 한 덩어리 자른 다음 그 위에 잼을 살살 발랐다. 
“음, 냄새 한 번 근사하다.”라며 그가 말했어요. “아니자 일단 만들고 있던 재킷(웃옷) 남은 부분마저 마무리 짓고 빵을 한 입 베어 물어야지.”
그는 그 빵을 가까이에 두고 즐겁게 다시 바느질을 한 땀 한 땀 ‘이탈리안 장인의 정성으로’(←시크릿 가든 드라마가 갑자기 생각나서 제가 추가한 부분임ㅋㅋ) 계속했어요. 
그러는 동안 달콤한 잼의 냄새가 벽을 타고 올라가고 있었지요.
아시죠, 벽엔 수많은 파리들이 앉아 있잖아요. 그래서 파리들이 구미가 당겨 주인 행세를 하러 잼 위로 내려왔어요.
“얼씨구! 니들 뭐야? 누가 초대했는데?”라며 꼬마 재봉사가 이 불청객들을 쫓아내며 말했어요. 
하지만 때마침 그 파리들이 외국파리들이라 전혀 독일어(그림형제는 독일 사람임. ‘그림’은 독일성씨임. 그림 그리는 ‘그림’ 아님^^)를 못 알아듣고 전혀 도망가려고 하지 않았지요.
곧 더 많은 파리들이 친구들을 따라 내려왔어요.
마침내 우리의 꼬마 재봉사도 이성을 잃고 작업용 탁자 밑에 있던 서랍에서 헝겊 한 조각을 쥐며 말했어요.
“기다려, 내가 언제 니들보고 먹으랬어!”
그러면서 무지막지하게 파리들을 내리쳤어요.
그가 다시 헝겊 조각을 들어 팔 다리를 뻗으며 죽어 있는 파리들을 세려보니 어머나 자그마치 파리 7마리가 죽어있지 뭐예요.
“내가 이렇게 힘이 셌나?”라며 꼬마 재봉사는 자기 자신의 용맹함에 경탄해마지 않았어요.
“이런 소식은 온 마을에 알려야해!”
그래서 꼬마 재봉사가 서둘러 자신의 허리띠를 풀어 한 땀 한 땀 또 바느질을 해 큼직한 글씨체로 다음과 같이 허리띠 위에 새겨넣었어요.
“한 방에 일곱!”
“음, 마을이라!”라며 그가 계속 말했어요. “이왕이면 온 세상에 이 소식을 전하는 게 낫겠지!”
이제 그의 심장은 새끼 양의 꼬리처럼 기쁨으로 파닥이고 있었어요.
재봉사가 허리띠를 착용하곤 온 세상으로 나가보기로 결심했어요. 왜냐면 아무리 생각해도 자신의 용맹함을 드러내기엔 이 작업실이 너무 좁으니까요.
출발하기 전 그는 두고 가는 것이 없는지 집 안을 이리저리 살펴보았어요.
하지만 역시나 가지고 갈 건 없더군요.
다만 오래된 치즈 하나가 보여 그거라도 일단 호주머니 속에 쏙 집어넣고 갔어요.
그는 또한 문 앞에서 수풀 속에 갇힌 새 한 마리를 발견하곤 그 새도 치즈와 함께 자신의 호주머니 속에 쏙 넣고 걸어갔어요.
이제 그는 대담무쌍하게 여행을 떠났어요.
그는 몸이 가볍고 민첩해 피로감이 전혀 없었어요.
길을 따라 걷다보니 산으로 올라가네요.
그러다 산꼭대기까지 오게 되었어요.
여기엔 힘센 거인 한 명이 아주 만족스러운 듯 주변경치를 둘러보고 있었어요.
꼬마 재봉사가 용감무쌍하게 오르며 그에게 말했어요.
“안녕, 친구, 드넓은 세상을 내려다보고 있었구나! 난 지금 저쪽으로 가던 길이야, 내 운을 시험해보려고 말이지. 너 나와 함께 동행 하지 않으련?”
거인이 경멸스럽다는 듯이 재봉사를 쳐다보며 말했어요.
“나 원 참 같잖아서! 가소롭기 거지 없는 놈이군!”
“뭐가 어째?”라며 그 꼬마 재봉사가 자신의 코트(웃옷) 단추를 풀어 거인에게 허리띠를 보여주며 대답했어요. “내가 누군지 한 번 보시지!”
거인이 읽었어요. “한 방에 일곱 명이라고.”
거인이 생각하기론 재봉사가 주먹 한 방으로 일곱 명을 때려죽였다는 얘기 같아 이 조그마한 친구에게 약간의 경의심이 들려는 찰나.
그래도 거인은 재봉사가 너무 같잖게 생겨 시험해보고 싶어졌어요.
거인이 손에 묵직한 돌을 하나 쥐더니 꽉 손힘을 주었어요. 그래서 바위에서 물이 뚝뚝 떨어졌어요.
“너 이거 돼,”라며 거인이 말했어요. “이 만큼 힘이 있냔 말이야?”
“그게 다야?”라며 재봉사가 말했어요. “그건 애들 장난이지!”
그러면서 재봉사는 자신의 호주머니 속에 손을 집어넣어 부드러운 치즈를 꺼내 즙이 뚝뚝 떨어질 때까지 손으로 꽉 압착을 했어요.
“어때,”라며 재봉사가 말했어요. “이 정도면 믿어지지 않아?”
거인은 도대체 이 재봉사가 뭔 소릴 하는지 감이 안 잡히고 작은 놈이라 깔보는 심정이 너무 강해 믿질 않았어요.
그때 거인이 묵직한 돌을 하나 들고 하늘 높이 정말이지 시야(눈)에서 사라질 정도로까지 높이 던졌어요.
(거인의 대사→) “자, 꼬마 친구, 이렇게 한 번 해봐.”
“제법	던지는데,”라며 재봉사가 말했어요. “하지만 바위는 언젠가는 다시 땅으로 떨어지기 마련이야. 하지만 난 영원히 떨어지지 않게 그걸 던질 수 있지.”
그러더니 재봉사는 손을 자신의 호주머니 속에 넣더니 새를 꺼내 공중으로 던졌어요.
자유를 다시 찾은 그 새가 높이 높이 날아오르며 다시 돌아오지 않았어요.
“어때 이만하면 만족하겠지, 친구?”라며 재봉사가 물었어요.
“음 던지는 건 확실히 확인했고,”라며 그 거인이 말했어요. “하지만 우린 아직 네가 뭔가를 옮길 수 있는지는 안 봤어.”
거인은 꼬마 재봉사를 데리고 거대한 떡갈나무(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/IwcZ2E ) 하나 앞으로 갔어요. 그 떡갈나무는 땅바닥위에 쓰러져 누워있었어요.
거인이 말했어요.
“네 힘이 충분하다면 내가 이 나무를 숲 밖으로 옮기는 걸 도와봐.”
“기꺼이,”라며 작은 남자(꼬마 재봉사)가 대답했어요. “네가 나무 몸통을 어깨 위에 올려 매(어깨 위에 둬), 그럼 내가 나뭇가지들과 잔가지들이 있는 부분을 들 테니. 어쨌든 가지들이 가장 무거운 부분이니까 말이야.”
거인이 나무 몸통을 어깨 위에 올려 맸다. 
반면 재봉사는 나뭇가지 위에 걸터앉았다. 
나무 몸통 때문에 고개를 돌릴 수 없는 거인은 온전히 혼자 그 무거운 나무를 옮겨야했다. 게다가 나뭇가지 위에 올라앉은 재봉사까지 덤으로 말이다.
뒤에 앉은 재봉사는 기분이 무척 즐겁고 행복해져 중얼중얼 노래를 불렀다. 
“저기 성문으로 재봉사 세 사람이 말을 타고 지나간다네.”
정말이지 나무 옮기기가 식은 죽 먹기보다 쉽지 않은가.
무거운 나무에다 재봉사까지 지고 걷던 거인이 도저히 지쳐 더는 갈 수 없어 소리쳤다. 
“아이고 힘들어, 나무 더는 못 옮기겠네, 이만 내려놓아야겠다!”
재봉사가 얼른 날쌔게 뛰어내린 다음 두 팔로 얼른 나무 몸통을 잡았다. 마치 지금껏 거인과 같이 옮긴 것처럼 말이다. 
재봉사가 거인에게 말했다. 
“이봐 덩치만 큰 친구, 고작 이 정도 옮기고 마는 거야!”
그들은 함께 걸었다. 
그들이 벚꽃 나무 아래를 지나갈 때, 거인이 나무 꼭대기를 잡아 아래로 구부려 당기며 그걸 재봉사의 손에 건네며, 대롱대롱 매달려 있는 잘 익은 열매(버찌. 벚꽃 나무의 열매)를 따 먹으라고 제안했다. 
하지만 꼬마 재봉사의 힘은 너무도 약해 그 나무를 쥐고 있을 수 없었다. 때마침 거인이 나무 꼭대기를 쏙 놓자 나무가 도로 솟아올랐고 그 바람에 나무를 쥐고 있던 재봉사까지 하늘로 날아가고 말았다. 
다행히 재봉사가 다치지 않고 땅에 내려오자, 거인이 말했다. 
“뭐야 이거? 그 잘난 체를 하더니 그 허약한 잔가지 하나 쥐고 있을 힘도 없었던 거야?”  
“힘이 부족한 게 아냐,”라며 꼬마 재봉사가 대답했어요. “넌 한 방에 일곱을 쓰러뜨린 남자를 뭘로 보고 하는 소리야? 울창한 숲 속에서 사냥꾼이 총을 쏘기에 내가 나무를 뛰어넘은 거라고. 너도 할 수 있을 거 같음 한 번 뛰어넘어봐.”
거인이 시도를 해보았지만 도저히 그 나무를 뛰어넘을 수 없었어요.
게다가 뛰어넘으려다 나뭇가지에 걸리는 바람에 재봉사가 우세하다는 것만 인정한 꼴이 되고 말았죠.
거인이 말했어요.
“네가 그토록 용맹한 친구라면, 나를 따라 우리 동굴로 가서 우리들과 함께 하룻밤을 보내자.”
꼬마 재봉사가 기꺼이 그 제안에 응해 거인을 따라갔어요.
그들이 동굴로 들어서자, 다른 거인들이 불가에 앉아 각자 불에 구운 양 한 마리씩을 손에 쥐고 먹고 있었어요.
꼬마 재봉사는 주변을 둘러보며 생각했지요.
‘음, 여긴 내 재봉사작업실보단 훨씬 더 넓구나.’
거인이 재봉사에게 침대 하나를 보여주며 오늘은 거기 누워 잠자라고 말했어요.
하지만 그 침대는 꼬마 재봉사에게 너무도 컸어요. 
그래서 재봉사는 침대에 벌러덩 드러눕진 못하고 침대 위 한쪽 구석에서 잠들었어요. 
밤 12시가 되어 꼬마 재봉사가 잠이 들었을 거라 생각한 거인이 자리에서 일어나 철 몽둥이를 쥐고 다가와 한 방에 그 침대를 박살내버렸어요.
그러곤 거인은 이것으로 얄미운 메뚜기(꼬마 재봉사)에게 필살기(죽음의 한 방)를 날렸다 생각했어요.
새벽 일찍 거인‘들’은 숲으로 나갔어요. 꼬마 재봉사 일은 까마듯이 잊고요.
그때 갑자기 꼬마 재봉사가 튀어 나오더니 거인들과 함께 흥겁고 대담무쌍하게 나란히 걸었어요.
거인들은 깜짝 놀라 생각했어요. 혹시 재봉사가 거인들 모두를 한 방에 죽일까 두려워진 거인들은 줄행랑을 쳐버렸어요(도망쳤어요).
꼬마 재봉사는 앞으로 계속 나아갔어요. 언제나 그렇듯 자신의 뾰족한 코가 가리키는 방향으로요.
한참을 걷고 보니 그는 어느 새 궁전의 안뜰에 들어와 있었어요.
몸이 지친 그가 잔디밭 위에 누워 쿨쿨 잠이 들었어요.
그가 거기 누워 자는 동안, 사람들이 와 보고 그의 몸 양 옆쪽을 살펴보다 허리띠에 적힌,
“한 방에 일곱.”이란 글귀를 읽게 되었어요.
“아,”라며 사람들이 말했어요. “이런 전쟁영웅께서 평화로운 이곳에 나타나시다니? 당장 왕께 보고 드려야겠어.” 
사람들이 왕께 그의 등장을 알렸어요.
그리고 혹시 나중에라도 전쟁이 터지면 중요하고 유용하게 쓰일 분일 수 있으니 여기 머물게 하면 좋겠다는 자신들의 의견도 같이 왕께 아뢰었어요. 
그 조언을 좋게 여긴 왕이 신하들을 그 꼬마 재봉사에게 보내 재봉사가 깨는 대로 군대에 봉사해줄 것을 부탁드리게 했어요.
특사(심부름하는 신하)가 잠자는 사람 옆에 서 있다, 꼬마 재봉사 기지개를 쭉 펴고 두 눈을 벌리며 일어나자, 그때서야 재봉사에게 왕의 제안을 전달했어요.
“내가 마다할 이유가 없지.”라며 재봉사가 대답했어요. “내 기꺼이 왕의 군인이 되겠네.”
그리하여 영광되게도 재봉사에겐 특별한 직책과 특별한 집이 주어졌어요.
하지만 기존의 군인들은 사람을 한 방에 일곱이나 죽인다는 이 꼬마 재봉사가 탐탐치 않았어요. 그래서 재봉사를 몰아내고 싶었어요.
“하지만 그 앞에서 반대를 했다간,”라며 기존 군인들이 서로 말을 주고받았어요. “그가 우릴 한 방에 일곱씩 죽일 수 있으니, 그에게 직접적으론 반대할 수 없어.”
그리하여 기존 군인들이 결론을 내리길, 모두 함께 왕에게로 나아가 퇴직(그만둠)해 달라고 청하며 그 이유로 넌지시 재봉사 얘길 하자는 거예요.
“저희들은 좋아할 수 없습니다.”라며 기존 군인들이 왕께 말했어요. “한 방에 사람을 일곱씩이나 죽이는 자와 함께 하라니요.”
왕은 충실한 하인들인 기존 군인들을 한 명도 잃고 싶지 않았어요.
그래서 차라리 재봉사를 만나지 말 걸 후회했지요. 그래서 다시 재봉사를 떨쳐버릴 꺼리를 만들었어요.
하지만 왕은 바보가 아니었던지라 재봉사에게 직접 해고 통지를 하는 모험은 하지 않았어요. 왜냐면 그랬다가는 재봉사가 한 방에 왕과 백성들을 다 죽이고 자신(재봉사)이 왕좌(왕의 의자)에 오르러 할 수 있었기 때문이죠.
한참을 궁리한 끝에 기가 막힌 생각이 떠올랐어요.
왕은 사람을 꼬마 재봉사에게 보내 그(재봉사)가 위대한 전사이니 한 가지 부탁할 게 있다 말했어요.
즉 숲에 두 거인이 강도질, 살인, 폭행, 불장난 등 각종 악행을 저지르고 있는데, 왕국에 있는 어느 누구도 이 둘 거인에게 접근할 수가 없었다는 거예요. 거인이 사람만 보면 죽이니까요.
그래서 만약 재봉사가 이 두 거인을 무찌르고 죽여만 준다면, 자신(왕)의 딸을 그(재봉사)의 아내로 주고 ‘신부의 혼인 지참금’으로 왕국의 반을 주겠노라 말했어요.
또한 거인을 무찌를 때 1백 명의 기마병을 보내 그(재봉사)를 돕겠다 말했어요.
‘그거야 말로 나 같은 ’호인‘(됨됨이가 좋은 사람)이 해볼 만한 일이지!’라며 꼬마 재봉사는 생각했어요. ‘게다가 아름다운 공주와 왕국 절반까지 준다니! 내 인생에 언제 이런 제안이 들어오겠어.’
“오 좋습니다.”라며 그가 대답했어요. “내 즉시 그 거인들을 제압하지요. 1백 명의 기마병들 도움이 필요 없습니다. 한 방에 일곱을 쳐 죽이는 제가 그깟 두 명(두 거인)이 무섭겠습니까.”
꼬마 재봉사가 출발하자 뒤이어 1백 명의 기마병들도 뒤따라갔어요.
숲의 변두리에 도착한 재봉사가 기마병들에게 말했어요.
“여기서 기다리고 있어요, 나 혼자서도 금방 그 거인들을 해치울 수 있을 테니까.”
그런 다음 그는 숲으로 들어가 왼쪽 오른쪽 방향을 살폈다.
머지않아 두 거인이 눈에 들어왔다. 
그들은 어느 나무 아래에 누워 자고 있었다. 어찌나 코들을 고는 지 나뭇가지들이 위 아래로 흔들거렸다. 
놀고 있을 틈이 없던 꼬마 재봉사가 자신의 두 호주머니 한가득 돌들을 주워 모은 다음 그 나무를 타고 위로 올라갔다. 
나무를 반쯤 올라간 다음 재봉사가 나뭇가지를 타고 미끄러져 내려오더니, 잠꾸러기들(잠자는 거인들) 바로 위에 있는 나뭇가지 위에 걸터앉아, 거인 한 명의 가슴팍 위로 돌 하나를 하나씩 떨어뜨리고 또 떨어뜨렸다. 
한동안 그 거인은 전혀 기척도 없었다. 하지만 마침내 그 거인이 깨어나 친구를 밀치며 말했다. 
“나 왜 쳐?”
“꿈꿨겠지,”라며 그 친구가 말했다. “난 너 안 건드렸어.”
그들은 그렇게 다시 누워 잠이 들었다. 
그때 재봉사가 돌멩이 하나를 두 번째 거인 위로 내던졌다. 
“너 이게 무슨 의미야?”라며 그 두 번째 거인이 발끈하며 소리쳤다. 
“던진 건 너잖아?”
“난 너한테 안 던졌다니까.”라며 두 번째 거인이 으르렁거리며 말했다.
그들이 한동안 그 문제로 옥신각신 다투었다. 
하지만 그들은 피곤했던 터라 그 문제를 덮어두고 일단 눈부터 붙이기로 했다, 한 번 더. 
꼬마 재봉사가 다시 자신의 게임을 시작했다. 재봉사는 이번엔 가장 큰 돌멩이를 주워와 그걸 첫 번째 거인의 가슴팍 위로 힘차게 내던졌다. 
“너무 아프잖아!”라며 그가 미친 사람 마냥 벌떡 일어나 친구를 밀치며 말했다. 어찌나 큰 동작이던지 나무가 흔들렸을 정도였다. 
친구 거인도 지지 않고 첫 번째 거인을 밀쳤다. 그렇게 그들은 길길이 화를 내다 나무를 뽑아 오랫동안 상대방을 호되게 내리쳤다. 
그러다 그들이 마침내 거의 동시에 땅 바닥 위에 뻗어 죽어버렸다. 
그때서야 꼬마 재봉사가 땅 위로 폴짝 뛰어내렸다. 
“다행히,”라며 그가 말했다. “거인들이 내가 앉아 있던 나무를 뽑진 않았어. 하마터면 이 나무 저 나무 위로 다람쥐처럼 뛰어다닐 뻔 했어. 하지만 뭐 우리 재봉사들은 날쌔니까.”
그는 자신의 검을 뽑아 거인들의 가슴팍 위를 두 세 차례 찔렀어요.
그런 다음 기마병들에게로 가 말했어요.
“다 해치웠어. 두 놈 모두 한 방에 해치웠어. 하지만 간단하지 않았다고! 놈들이 위기에 처하자 나무들을 뽑고 방어에 들어가서 말이야, 그렇지만 모두 다 헛수고였지, 나 같이 한 방에 일곱을 때려눕히는 자 앞에선 말이야.” 
“어디 다치신 데는 없으십니까?”라며 기마병들이 물었어요.
“그런 거라면 전혀 염려 안 해도 돼,”라며 재봉사가 말했어요. “거인들은 내 머리카락 하나 건드릴 수 없었으니까 말이야.”
기마병들은 그 말이 믿기지 않았어요. 그래서 그들은 숲속으로 말을 타고 들어갔지요.
그런데 거기에 정말로 두 거인이 피를 콸콸 흐리며 죽어 누어있고 주변의 나무들이 온통 뿌리째 뽑혀 있지 뭐예요.
꼬마 재봉사는 왕에게 약속했던 보상을 달라 청했어요.
하지만 사람 마음이 간사하잖아요. 
왕이 자신의 말을 후회하는 거예요. 그래서 어떻게 하면 이 영웅을 없앨까 궁리하고 또 궁리했어요.
“내 딸과 왕국의 절반을 받기 전에,”라며 왕이 그에게 말했어요. “자넨 영웅적인 위업(=일)을 하나 더 달성해야하네. 숲에 ‘방랑하는’(어슬렁거리는) ‘유니콘’(뿔이 하나 달린 전설의 동물)이 한 마리 있는데 여간 피해를 끼치는 게 아니네, 자네가 가 그 놈을 잡아주게.”
“그런 거라면 거인 두 명을 해치울 때보다 훨씬 덜 두려운데요. 한 방에 일곱을 해치우는 게 제 주특기니까요.”
그(재봉사)는 새끼줄 하나와 도끼 한 자루를 쥐고 숲으로 여행을 떠났다.
왕은 사람들을 같이 보내 그를 돕게 했는데, 그는 이 사람들을 숲 밖에서 대기하게 했다. 
그는 오랫동안 찾아다녀야했다. 
곧 유니콘이 그의 앞에 나타나더니 다짜고짜 그를 향해 돌진해왔다.
마치 자신의 뿔로 한 방에 그를 산산조각 내버릴 심산인거 같았다. 
“워~, 워~. 도저히 따라 잡을 수 없겠는걸.”라고 그가 말하면서 그 동물이 아주 가까이로 다가올 때가지 가만 서 있었다. 그런 다음 잽싸게 나무 뒤로 확 숨었다. 
전 속력으로 그 나무에 달려들던 유니콘의 뿔이 너무도 쌔게 나무 몸통에 박히는 바람에 유니콘이 자신의 힘으로는 뿔을 나무에서 뺄 수가 없게 되었다.  
그리하여 유니콘은 붙잡히게 되었다. 
“이제 잡았다.”라며 재봉사가 그 나무 뒤에서 뛰어나와 유니콘의 목에다 새끼줄을 감았다. 
그런 다음 재봉사는 들고 간 도끼로 그 나무에서 유니콘의 뿔을 잘라냈다. 
모든 준비를 마친 다음 그는 그 짐승을 끌고 왕에게로 갔다. 
왕은 이번에도 자신이 약속한 보상을 그에게 주지 않으려 들며 세 번째 요구를 했다.
즉 자신의 딸과 결혼하기 전에 그가 숲을 마구 부수고 있는 야생 멧돼지 한 마리를 잡아 와야 한다는 것이다. 다만 이 일을 돕기 위해 사냥꾼들을 그와 함께 보내주겠다고 왕은 제안했다. 
“좋습니다,”라며 재봉사가 말했어요. “그거야 애들 장난이죠!”
그는 사냥꾼들을 데리고 숲 속으로 가진 않았어요, 왜냐하면 야생 멧돼지가 여러 차례 그들(사냥꾼들)을 들이받았기 때문에 그들(사냥꾼들)은 가만히 잠복해서 야생 멧돼지를 기다릴 용의가 전혀 없었던 거지요. 그래서 재봉사가 그들(사냥꾼들)을 데려가지 않자 그들(사냥꾼들)이 아주 기뻐했어요.
멧돼지는 재봉사를 보자마자 입에 거품을 밀고 엄니(어금니)를 바드득 바드득 갈며 달려들었어요. 한 방에 재봉사를 땅에 냅다 내동댕이칠 작정인 모양이었어요.
하지만 날쌘 거라면 우리의 영웅도 뒤지지 않기에 잽싸게 근처에 있던 교회 예배당으로 도망쳤답니다. 그와 동시에 재봉사는 창가로 달려가 도로 밖으로 빠져나왔어요.
재봉사를 뒤쫓아 멧돼지도 교회 예배당 안으로 달려 들어갔고요.
그때 재봉사가 빙 돌아서 뒤로 와 문을 쾅하고 닫았어요.
미친 듯이 날뛰는 짐승(멧돼지)은 너무 몸이 무겁고 어색해 그 창문을 뛰어넘지 못하고 갇히고 말았어요.
그때 꼬마 재봉사가 저쪽에서 대기하고 있던 사냥꾼들을 불렀어요. 사냥꾼들이 두 눈으로 ‘갇힌 자’(멧돼지)를 볼 수 있게요.
일이 이쯤 되고 나니 영웅이 왕에게 가자 왕도 좋든 싫든 자신의 약속을 이행하지 않을 수가 없게 되었지요. 그래서 왕은 자신의 딸과 왕국의 절반을 그에게 주었어요.
만약 왕이 그가 전쟁을 좋아하는 영웅이 아니며 그냥 단지 그(왕) 앞에 서 있는 꼬마 재봉사에 지나지 않은 걸 알았더라면 아마 마음이 무거워 더 죽을 맛이었겠지요.
결혼식은 아주 성대하고 ‘소소하게’(재봉사에서 왕이 되는 작은 기쁨. 왕보다 재봉사 일이 더 좋았다는 얘기) 거행되어 재봉사는 이제 왕이 되었어요.
얼마 지나지 않아 젊은 왕비는 자신의 남편이 밤에 잘 때 꿈결에 이렇게 말하는 것을 듣게 되었어요.
“이 놈아, ‘더블릿’(15~17세기의 남자 옷 상의. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/xy65zu )을 만들어, ‘판탈롱’(과거 남자 다리에 밀착된 바지)도 꿰매고, 그렇지 않음 ‘자’(길이를 재는 자)로 네 놈 귀뺨매기를 후려 줄줄 알아.”
그제야 왕비는 자신의 젊은 군주(남편)가 실은 천하게 태어난 재봉사란 것을 알고 다음 날 아바마마를 찾아가 자신이 속아서 결혼하게 되었다고 하소연을 했어요.
왕비는 아빠에게 자신이 고작 재봉사인 남편에게서 벗어날 수 있게 도와 달라 애걸했어요. 
왕이 그녀를 안심시키며 말했어요.
“오늘 밤 네 침실 문을 열어놓거라, 그럼 내 부하들이 밖에서 대기하고 있다 그가 잠에 곯아떨어지면 즉시 동아줄로 묶어다 배에 태워 무인도(섬)에 두고 오겠다.”
여자는 그 제안에 안심했어요.
하지만 때마침 이 대화를 ‘왕(왕비의 아버지인 왕)의 갑옷 운반자’가 다 듣고 말았어요.
이 ‘갑옷 운반자’는 ‘젊은 군주’(꼬마 재봉사)와 사이가 좋았어요. 그래서 젊은 군주에게 이 계획을 몽땅 다 알려주었어요.
“그럼 ‘훼방’(=방해) 한 번 놓아볼까.”라며 꼬마 재봉사가 말했어요.
밤이 되자 그(꼬마 재봉사)는 평소와 다름없이 아내와 함께 잠이 들었어요.
그가 잠이 들었다 생각한 그녀가 가만히 일어나 문을 열더니 도로 다시 침대로 가 누웠어요.
자던 척을 하고 있던 꼬마 재봉사가 또렷한 목소리로 이렇게 큰 소리로 말하기 시작했어요.
“이 놈아, ‘더블릿’(15~17세기의 남자 옷 상의. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/xy65zu )을 만들어, ‘판탈롱’(과거 남자 다리에 밀착된 바지)도 꿰매고, 그렇지 않음 ‘자’(길이를 재는 자)로 네 놈 귀뺨매기를 후려 줄줄 알아. 나는 한 방에 일곱을 때려눕히는 자야. 두 거인도 내가 죽였지. 유니콘도 내가 잡아 왔고 야생 멧돼지도 내가 가두었지. 이런 내가 고작 방 밖에 서 있는 자들을 두려워할 소냐. 같잖긴.”
재봉사가 말하는 걸 들은 사람들은 엄청난 두려움에 휩싸인 나머지, 사나운 사냥꾼이 뒤쫓아 오기라도 하는 듯 줄행랑(도망)을 쳐버렸어요. 
그 이후는 어느 누구도 감히 더 그(꼬마 재봉사)에게 대항할 생각을 품지 못했답니다.
그리하여 왕이었던 꼬마 재봉사는 남은 생도 왕으로 지내며 잘 살았답니다.


(끝)

동화 「용감한 꼬마 재봉사」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「용감한 꼬마 재봉사」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter20.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



21. 신데렐라


■ 미리알림

디즈니 동화와 다릅니다. 그림형제의 동화는 옛날 동화라, 디즈니 동화와는 내용이 사뭇 다릅니다. 그림형제의 신데렐라는, 디즈니 동화보단 재미없어요. 읽고 실망 마세요~ㅎㅎ 그냥 디즈니 동화의 옛날 모습은 어땠는지 아는 정도로 읽으시면 좋을 거 같습니다. :)
그림형제의 동화 「신데렐라」에는 계단에서 ‘유리 구두’가 아니라, ‘슬리퍼’가 벗겨졌다고 나옵니다. 
그래도 재미를 위해 영어원문의 슬리퍼를 모두 유리 구두로 해석했음.ㅋㅋ
슬리퍼? 유리 슬리퍼가 아닐지! ㅎㅎ 



(분문 시작)


신데렐라


돈 많은 남자의 아내가 병에 걸렸다.
그녀는 남은 생이 얼마 남지 않은 걸 느끼곤 하나 뿐인 딸아이를 침대 곁으로 불러 말했다. 
“얘야, 착하고 경건하게 살거라. 그럼 하느님께서 너를 항상 보살펴주실 게다. 그리고 나도 하늘나라에서 항상 너를 내려다보고 네 가까이 있겠다.”
그 후 즉시 그녀가 눈을 감곤 세상을 떠났다. 
소녀는 매일 같이 엄마 무덤가로 가 울었다. 
그리고 경건하고 착하게 살았다. 
겨울이 오고 눈이 무덤 위로 새하얀 종이 마냥 덮였다. 그런 다음 봄이 오자 태양이 그걸 다시 덜어냈다. 
그리고 남자(신데렐라의 아빠)는 새 아내를 맞아들였다. 
그 여자는 두 딸을 집으로 데려왔다. 그녀들은 아름다웠고 얼굴이 미인이었지만 속이 시꺼멓고 사악했다.
이제 가련한 의붓자식(신데렐라)은 고된 시기를 겪게 되었다. 
“저 바보 거위 같은 게 왜 우리랑 같이 응접실에 있는데?”라며 그들이 말했다. 
“빵을 먹으려면 일을 해야 될 거 아냐. 이 ‘부엌데기’(부엌일을 하는 여자)야.”
그녀들은 신데렐라에게서 예쁜 옷들을 모조리 벗기고 낡고 칙칙한 잠옷을 입히고 ‘나막신’(나무를 파서 만든 신)을 주었다.
“공주처럼 잘난 체하더니, 지금 저 꼬락서니를 좀 봐봐!”라며 그들이 소리치며 웃었다.
그들은 신데렐라를 부엌으로 데리고 갔다. 
거기서 그녀는 아침부터 밤늦도록 힘든 일을 해야 했다.
새벽이 오기 전 일어나 물을 기르고 불씨를 켜고 요리를 하고 그릇을 씻어야했다.
이 외에도 자매들은 그녀를 상상할 수 없을 만큼 괴롭혔다…. 그녀를 놀리며 완두콩과 ‘렌즈콩’(렌즈 모양의 콩. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/cPPolt )을 잿더미들 속에 넣곤, 신데렐라보고 앉아서 다시 그릇에 콩을 담으라고 강요했다. 
저녁 무렵이 되어 완전히 지친 상태에서도 신데렐라는 침대로 갈 수 없었다. 그녀는 잿더미가 있는 부엌 난롯가 옆에서 자야만 했기 때문이다.
이런 까닭에 그녀는 항상 지저분하고 더러운 모습을 하고 있었어요.
그래서 사람들이 그녀를 ‘신데렐라’(‘숯덩이’라는 뜻임)라고 불렀어요.
한 번은 아빠가 장(시장)에 가시게 되었는데, 두 의붓딸들에게 무엇을 사다줄까 물어셨어요.
“예쁜 드레스요.”라고 한 명이 말했어요.
“진주와 보석요.”라며 둘째가 말했어요.
“그럼 너는, 신데렐라야.”라며 그가 말했어요. “너는 무얼 갖고 싶으니?”
“아빠, 오시는 길에 아빠의 모자를 스치는 첫 번째 나뭇가지를 겪어다 주세요.”
그리하여 아빠는 아름다운 드레스와 진주와 보석을 두 의붓딸들을 위해 샀고요, 돌아오는 길에 초록의 잡목 숲을 말을 타고 지나오게 되었는데, 때마침 ‘개암나무의 잔가지 하나’(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/EKCix4 )가 자신의 모자를 툭하고 건드리며 모자를 훔쳐가는 거예요.
그래서 그는 그 잔가지를 겪어 함께 지니고 왔어요.
집에 도착한 그가 두 의붓딸들에게 그들이 바라던 것을 주었고요, 신데렐라에게도 개암나무에서 겪어온 잔가지를 주었어요.
신데렐라는 아빠에게 고맙다고 말했어요. 그런 다음 엄마 무덤으로 가 그 잔가지를 무덤 위에 심고 울었어요. 그래서 많은 눈물들이 그 위로 떨어져 물을 준 것과 같아졌어요.
잔가지가 무럭무럭 자라 어느덧 잘생긴 나무로 자랐어요.
이제 하루에 세 번씩 신데렐라는 거기로 가 그 나무 아래에 앉아 울며 기도를 올렸어요.
그럼 항상 작고 새하얀 새 한 마리가 그 나무 위에 날아와 앉았답니다.
그러다 신데렐라가 소원이라도 빌면, 그 새가 그녀가 바라던 걸 “휙!” 하고 아래로 던져주었어요.
그러다 한 번은 우연히도 국왕폐하께서 연회(큰잔치)를 3일 동안 하신다고 발표했어요.
그러면서 왕국 내에 있는 모든 아름다운 아가씨들을 다 초대한다는 거예요. 
바로 자신의 아들에게 어울릴 신부를 찾아주기 위해서죠.
두 의붓자매들도 이 소식을 듣고서 자신들도 연회에 참석할 수 있게 된 것을 크게 기뻐하며 신데렐라를 부르며 말했어요.
“우리 머리 좀 빗어줘, 우리 구두를 닦아놔, 우리 ‘버클’(허리띠를 고정시키는 쇠) 좀 땡겨줘. 왜냐면 우린 이제 궁전으로 가 연회에 참석할 예정이니까.”
신데렐라는 그 말을 따랐어요. 하지만 자신도 그들과 함께 춤추러 너무 가고 싶어 울었어요.
그래서 새엄마에게 자신도 가게 해 달라 간청했어요.
“네가 가겠다고, 신데렐라 네가!”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “넌 지저분하고 더러워서 연회에 갈 수 없잖니? 넌 옷도 구두도 없어서 춤도 출 수 없어!”
하지만 신데렐라가 계속 조르자 새엄마도 마침내 이렇게 말했어요.
“내가 방금 ‘렌즈콩’(렌즈 모양의 콩) 한 접시를 잿더미 속에 부어봤다. 만약 네가 그걸 2시간 만에 다 주워 담으면 우리와 함께 데려가 주마.”
처녀는 뒷문을 통해 정원으로 가 큰소리로 말했어요.
“순한 집비둘기들아, 멧비둘기(야생비둘기)들아, 하늘 아래 있는 너희 모든 새들아, 이리 와 내가 주워 담는 걸 도와주지 않으련.”
“좋은 콩은 그릇에 도로 담고, 나쁜 콩은 여기 담으면 돼.”
그러자 두(2) 흰색 집비둘기들이 부엌 창문을 통해 날아 들어왔어요.
그 후 멧비둘기들도 날아 들어왔고요. 마침내 하늘 아래의 모든 새들이 휙 휙 소리를 내며 모여 들며 잿더미들 사이에 섰어요.
비둘기들이 고개를 끄떡거리며 줍고, 또 줍고, 또, 또 줍기 시작했어요.
그리고 나머지 새들도 또한 줍고, 또 줍고, 또, 또 줍기 시작했어요.
그래서 모든 좋은 콩들이 그릇에 담아졌어요.
채 한 시간이 안 돼 새들이 모두 주워 담고는 “푸드덕!” 다시 하늘로 날아가 버렸어요.
그런 다음 소녀가 그 그릇을 새엄마에게 가져갔어요.
이제 그녀도 연회에 그녀들과 함께 갈 수 있으리라 믿고서요.
하지만 새엄마는 말했어요.
“아니, 신데렐라, 넌 옷도 없으니 춤을 출 수 없어. 네가 가 봐야 비웃음만 살게다.”
이 말에 신데렐라가 울자, 새엄마가 말했어요.
“내가 쏟은 두 접시의 렌즈콩을 네가 한 시간 만에 다 주워 담는다면 그땐 너도 우리와 갈 수 있다.”
그러면서 새엄마는 속으로 생각했어요.
‘네가 뭔 수로 그걸 한 시간 만에 다해.’
새엄마가 렌즈콩 두 그릇을 잿더미에 쏟자, 처녀는 뒷문을 통해 정원으로 가 소리쳤어요.
“순한 집비둘기들아, 멧비둘기(야생비둘기)들아, 천국(하늘) 아래 있는 너희 모든 새들아, 이리 와 내가 주워 담는 걸 도와주지 않으련.”
“좋은 콩은 그릇에 도로 담고, 나쁜 콩은 여기 담아주면 돼.”
그러자 두(2) 흰색 집비둘기들이 부엌 창문을 통해 날아 들어왔어요.
그 후 멧비둘기들도 날아 들어왔고요. 마침내 하늘 아래의 모든 새들이 휙 휙 소리를 내며 모여 들며 잿더미들 사이에 섰어요.
비둘기들이 고개를 끄떡거리며 줍고, 또 줍고, 또, 또 줍기 시작했어요.
그리고 나머지 새들도 또한 줍고, 또 줍고, 또, 또 줍기 시작했어요.
그래서 모든 좋은 콩들이 그릇에 담아졌어요.
그래서 채 30분이 안 돼서 새들이 모두 주워 담고는 “푸드덕!” 다시 하늘로 날아가 버렸어요.
그런 다음 처녀가 그 그릇들을 새엄마에게 가져갔어요.
처녀는 기뻤어요. 이제야 말로 그들과 함께 자신도 연회가 갈 수 있을 거라 믿었으니까요.
하지만 새엄마는 말했어요.
“수고는 했다만, 그래도 우리와 함께 갈 수 없다. 너는 옷이 없어 춤도 못 추잖니. 우리가 너 때문에 창피 당할 일 있니!”
이 말을 남기고 새엄마는 신데렐라에게서 돌아서며 서둘러 자신의 콧대 높은 두 딸들과 함께 출발했어요.
이제 집에 아무도 안 남자, 신데렐라는 개암나무 아래 있는 엄마 무덤으로 가 울었어요.
“와들와들 흔들리는 어린 나무야, 은과 금을 내게 내려줘.”
그러자 새가 금과 은으로 된 드레스(옷)를 그녀에게 던져주었어요. 그리고 비단과 은으로 무늬를 새겨 놓은 ‘유리 구두(원문→실내화)를 던져주었어요.
그녀는 전속력으로 드레스(옷)를 입고 연회장으로 출발했어요.
그녀의 새엄마와 의붓자매들도 그녀를 알아보지 못했어요. 그들은 그녀가 외국의 공주일 거라 생각했어요. 왜냐면 황금 드레스를 입은 그녀의 모습이 너무도 아름다워 보였기 때문이에요.
그들은 신데렐라를 한 번도 떠올리지 않았어요. 신데렐라는 지금까지도 집의 지저분한 구석에 앉아 잿더미 속에서 렌즈콩들을 줍고 있을 거라 믿었기 때문이죠.
왕자가 그녀를 맞이했어요. 왕자는 그녀의 손을 잡고 함께 춤을 추었어요.
그는 다른 처녀들과는 전혀 춤을 추려하지 않았어요. 그리고 그녀의 손을 놓으려고도 하지 않았어요. 만약 누가 그녀에게 춤을 신청하러 다가오기라도 하면, 왕자는 말했어요.
“이 분은 제 파트너입니다.”
그녀는 밤까지 춤을 추웠어요. 
그때 그녀가 집에 가고 싶었어요.
하지만 왕자님이 말했어요.
“나도 당신과 함께 가겠소. 내가 당신 일행을 데려다 드리리다.”
왜냐면 왕자는 이 아리따운 처녀가 누구의 따님인지 알고 싶었기 때문이지요.
하지만 그녀는 왕자님에게서 벗어나 비둘기장(=새장) 속으로 뛰어들고 말았어요.
왕자님은 그녀의 아빠가 올 때까지 기다려 그에게 그 낯선 처녀가 비둘기장 속으로 뛰어들었다고 말했어요.
노인(신데렐라의 아빠)이 생각했어요.
‘신데렐라를 말하시는 건가?’
그래서 그들(아빠와 왕자)이 도끼 한 자루와 곡괭이 하나를 가져오게 했어요. 아빠가 비둘기장을 도끼로 찍어 조각냈어요. 하지만 안에 아무도 없었어요.  
그들이 집에 도착해보니, 신데렐라는 지저분한 옷을 입은 채 잿더미 사이에 누워 자고 있었고, ‘벽난로 위 선반’ 위에선 작은 석유램프 하나가 희미한 빛을 내며 타고 있었어요. 왜냐면 신데렐라가 비둘기장에서 급하게 뛰어내려 어린 개암나무(신데렐라의 집 근처)까지 달려와, 자신의 아름다운 옷들을 벗어 무덤(엄마 무덤) 위에 올려놓았기 때문이지요. 새들이 그 옷들을 다시 가져갔어요. 그런 다음 그녀(신데렐라)는 자신의 회색 가운(잠옷)을 입고 부엌의 잿더미들 사이로 ‘들’(=자리할) 수 있었어요.     
다음 날 연회가 다시 시작이 되었어요.
그녀의 부모님과 ‘의붓자매’(새엄마가 데려온 딸)들이 다시 한 번 연회장으로 추발했어요.
신데렐라는 개암나무로 가 말했어요….
“와들와들 흔들리는 어린 나무야, 은과 금을 내게 내려줘.”
그러자 새가 어제보다 훨씬 더 아름다운 드레스 하나를 던져주었어요. 
이 드레스를 입고서 신데렐라는 연회장에 나타났답니다. 모든 이들이 그녀의 아름다움에 감탄해마지 않았어요.
왕자님은 그녀가 올 때까지 기다리고 있다 즉시 그녀의 손을 잡으며 어느 누구도 아닌 오직 그녀와만 춤을 추었어요.
다른 사람이 그녀에게 춤 신청을 하러 다가오면, 왕자님은 말했어요.
“그녀는 내 파트너라네.”
밤이 되자 그녀는 가고 싶었어요. 
그런데 왕자님이 그녀를 뒤따라가며 그녀가 어느 집으로 들어가는지를 보고 싶어 했어요.
하지만 그녀는 왕자님에게서 벗어나 집 뒤에 있는 정원으로 뛰어들었어요.
거기엔 아주 맛난 배들이 수북이 매달려 있는 아름답고 키가 큰 나무가 하나 서 있었어요.
그녀가 마치 다람쥐처럼 그 나뭇가지들 사이로 민첩하게 빠져나갔기 때문에, 왕자님은 그녀가 어디로 가는지 알지 못했어요.
왕자님은 그녀의 아빠가 올 때까지 기다린 후 그에게 말했어요.
“그 낯선 여인이 제게서 떠나가 버렸어요. 제 생각엔 저기 저 배나무를 타고 올라간 거 같습니다.”
아빠가 생각했어요.
“정말 신데렐라인가?”
그가 도끼를 한 자루 가져와 그 나무를 베어냈어요. 하지만 그 나무 위엔 아무도 없었어요.
그들이 부엌에 들어가자, 신데렐라가 평소와 같은 모습으로 잿더미 사이에 누워 있었어요. 왜냐면 그녀가 그 배나무의 반대쪽에서 뛰어내렸기 때문이죠. 그리고 입었던 아름다운 드레스는 그 개암나무 위에 있던 새에게 주고 자신의 회색 가운(잠옷)을 입었지요.
세 번째 날, 부모님과 자매들이 출발하자, 신데렐라는 한 번 더 엄마 무덤으로 가 사랑스런 나무에게 말했어요…
“와들와들 흔들리는 어린 나무야, 은과 금을 내게 내려줘.”
그러자 그 새가 이전에 그녀가 입었었던 그 어떤 옷보다 훨씬 더 빛나고 훌륭한 드레스 한 벌과 황금 ‘유리 구두’(원문→실내화)를 던져주었어요. 
그래서 그녀가 그 드레스를 입고서 연회장으로 갔어요.
사람들이 그녀의 아름다움에 어찌나 놀라든지요.
왕자님은 그녀와만 춤을 추었어요. 누가 다가와 그녀에게 춤 신청을 하려하면, 왕자님이 말했어요.
“그녀는 내 ‘여자다’(원문→파트너다).”
밤이 되자, 신데렐라는 떠나고 싶었어요.
그리고 왕자님도 그녀와 함께 가고 싶어 했고요.
하지만 그녀가 재빨리 왕자님에게서 벗어났기 때문에 왕지님은 그녀를 뒤따를 수 없었어요.
하지만 왕자님도 이번엔 꾀를 한 가지 냈어요. 즉 온(=모든) 계단에 ‘액체 석유’(=역청)를 바른 거지요. 
바로 거기를 그녀가 뛰어 내려가다 유리 구두 ‘한 짝’(=하나)이 ‘액체 석유’에 들러붙고 말았어요.
왕자님이 그 유리 구두를 집어 들었어요.
작고 우아한 황금 유리 구두였어요.
다음 날 아침 왕자가 아바마마에게 가 말했어요.
“이 황금 유리 구두가 발에 맞는 여인이 아니면 절대 제 아내로 맞이하지 않겠습니다.”
그러자 두 자매는 기뻤어요. 왜냐면 그녀들의 발이 무척 작았기 때문이죠.
큰언니가 유리 구두를 들고 자기 방으로 가 신으려고 애를 썼어요. 그녀 엄마가 옆에 서 있었지요.
하지만 큰언니의 큰 발가락은 그 유리 구두에 들어가지 않았어요, 유리 구두가 그녀의 발에 너무 작았던 거예요.
그러자 그녀 엄마가 그녀에게 식칼 하나를 주며 말했어요.
“발가락을 잘라라. 네가 왕비가 되면 더 이상 발로 걸을 필요가 없지 않니.”
처녀는 발가락을 자르곤 강제로 발을 그 유리 구두에 집어넣었어요. 그녀는 고통을 꾹 참고서 왕자님에게로 갔어요.
그런 다음 왕자는 그녀를 자신의 신부로 말에 태우곤 함께 떠났지요.
하지만 무덤(신데렐라 엄마의 무덤)을 지나갈 때, 거기 개암나무 위에 앉아 있던 두 마리의 집비둘기들이 큰 소리로 외쳤어요.
“들여다보세요, 들여다보세요, 유리 구두에서 피가 철철 흐른대요, 
그 유리 구두는 그녀의 발에 너무 작아요, 진짜 신부가 당신을 기다리고 있다네.”
그러자 왕자가 그녀의 발을 쳐다보았어요. 정말 그녀 발에서 피가 철철 흐르고 있는 게 보였어요.
왕자님이 말을 돌려 그 가짜 신부를 다시 집에 데려다 주며, 그녀는 진짜가 아니라고 ㅁ라하며, 다른 자매가 그 유리 구두를 신어보시라 말했어요.
그래서 둘째 언니가 유리 구두를 들로 자기 방으로 갔어요. 그녀의 발가락들이 그 유리 구두에 쏙 들어갔어요. 하지만 그녀의 발뒤꿈치가 너무 커서 안 들어갔어요.
그러자 그녀 엄마가 그녀에게 식칼을 하나 주며 말했어요.
“네 뒤꿈치를 조금 잘라라. 네가 왕비만 되면 더 이상 발로 걸을 필요가 없지 않니.”
그 처녀가 자신의 발뒤꿈치를 조금 자르고 자기 발을 반강제로 그 유리 구두에 밀어넣었어요.
그녀는 고통을 꾹 참고 왕자님에게로 갔어요.
왕자님이 그녀를 자신의 신부로서 말에 태우고 출발했어요.
하지만 그들이 그 개암나무 옆을 지나가려할 때, 두 사랑스런 집비둘기들이 개암나무 위에 앉아 있다 노래를 불렀어요.
“들여다보세요, 들여다보세요, 유리 구두에서 피가 콸콸 흘러요, 
그 유리 구두는 그녀의 발에 너무 작아요, 진짜 신부가 당신을 기다리고 있어요.”
왕자가 그녀의 발을 내려다보니 정말이지 피가 유리 구두에서 콸콸 흘러나와 그녀의 새하얀 스타킹이 얼룩져 있는 거예요.
그러자 왕자가 말을 돌려 그 가짜 신부를 집에다 도로 데려다 주었어요.
“이 여인은 또한 제 진짜 신부가 아닙니다.”라며 왕자가 말했어요. “이 집에 다른 따님은 안 계십니까?”
“네.”라며 그 아빠가 말했어요. “부엌데기(부엌에서 일하는 여자)로 자란 어린 것이 있긴 한데, 죽은 전 아내가 남긴 자식이죠. 하지만 도저히 그 애는 신부 감이 아닌 걸요.”
왕자님이 그녀를 데려와 달라고 그(아빠)에게 말했어요.
하지만 엄마(새엄마)가 대답했어요. 
“오, 아니에요, 그 애는 너무 더러워 사람들 앞에 나설 수 없는 걸요!”
왕자님이 한사코 주장했기 때문에 신데렐라를 불러야했다. 
그녀는 우선 두 손과 얼굴을 깨끗하게 씻고서 와 왕자님 앞에 허리를 숙여 인사를 드렸다(허리를 숙여 인사하는 건 신분이 아주 낮은 자가 왕에게 인사할 때 함). 
왕자가 그녀에게 황금 유리 구두를 주었다. 
그러자 그녀가 ‘등 없는 걸상’에 앉아 나막신(나무를 파서 만든 신)을 벗은 후 자기 발을 그 유리 구두에 밀어 넣었다. 
그건 정말이지 장갑처럼 그녀 발에 꼭 맞았다. 
그녀가 일어나자 왕자가 그녀의 얼굴을 쳐다보곤 지금까지 자신과 춤을 추었던 그 아름다운 여인이 그녀란 것을 깨닫고 소리쳤다. 
“이 여인이 내 진짜 신부요!”
새엄마와 두 의붓자매는 경악하다 못해 분노가 치밀어 얼굴이 창백해졌다. 
하지만 왕자는 신데렐라를 자신의 말에 태우고 함께 말을 타고 갔다. 
그들이 그 개암나무 옆을 지나갈 때, 흰 두(2) 비둘기들이 노래를 불렀다….
“들여다보세요, 들여다보세요, 유리 구두에서 피가 나지 않아요, 그 유리 구두는 그녀에게 너무 작지도 않아요, 진짜 신부님이 왕자님과 함께 말을 타고 가신다네.”
비둘기들은 그 노래를 다 부른 다음 푸드덕 날아 내려와 신데렐라의 두 어깨 위에 앉았어요.
하나는 그녀의 오른쪽 어깨 위에 다른 하나는 그녀의 왼쪽 어깨 위에 자리를 잡고 앉았답니다. 비둘기들은 그렇게 그녀의 어깨 위에 계속 머물렀어요.
왕자님과의 결혼식은 정말이지 성대하게 치러졌어요. 
두 가짜 자매들도 와서 신데렐라에게 호의를 베푸는 척하며 그녀(신데렐라)의 행운을 나눠 가지려했어요.
두 약혼자 커플이 교회로 갈 때, 큰언니는 신데렐라의 오른쪽 편에 있고, 작은 언니는 신데렐라의 왼쪽 편에 있었어요.
그때 비둘기(신데렐라의 어깨 위에 상주하던 비둘기들)들이 두 언니들에게서 눈을 하나씩 쪼아 뽑아버렸어요.
그 뒤 그들이 돌아올 때는 반대로, 큰언니는 신데렐라의 왼쪽 편에 있고, 작은 언니는 신데렐라의 오른쪽 편에 있었어요.
그러자 비둘기들이 두 언니들에게서 나머지 한쪽 눈마저 쪼아 뽑아버렸어요.
이렇게 하여 그녀들의 사악함과 거짓에 대한 벌로 그녀들은 남은 생을 장님(앞이 안 보임)으로 살아야했답니다.  


(끝)

동화 「신데렐라」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「신데렐라」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter21.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



22. 수수께끼



옛날 옛적에 세상을 여행해보고 싶은 열망에 사로잡힌 한(1) 왕자님이 계셨어요.
그래서 아무도 데려가지 않고 오직 충실한 하인 한 명과만 여행을 떠났답니다.
어느 날 울창한 숲에 들어가니, 사방에 깔린 건 어둠이요, 쉴 만한 곳은 물론이거니와 하룻밤 묵고 갈 만한 곳도 찾을 수 없는 거예요. 
그때 조그마한 집으로 다가가고 있는 소녀가 보였어요.
왕자가 다가가보니 그 처녀는 어리고 아름다웠어요.
왕자가 그녀에게 말했어요.
“얘야, 나와 내 하인이 이 누추한 집에서 하룻밤 묵고 갈 수 있겠니?”
“오, 네,”라며 그 소녀가 슬픈 목소리로 말했어요. “당신은 그러실 수 있지만, 하지만 전 그러시지 마시라 말씀드리고 싶어요. 들어가지 마세요.”
“아니 왜?”라며 왕자가 물었어요.
소녀는 한 숨을 쉬며 말했어요. “제 새엄마가 사악한 술수를 쓰기 때문이에요, 특히나 낯선 이방인에겐 호감을 갖고 계시지 않으세요.”
그래서 왕자는 대번에 그게 마녀의 집이란 걸 알아챘어요.
하지만 날이 너무 어둡고 더 갈 힘도 없고 또 무섭지도 않았던 왕자는 그냥 들어갔어요.
노파가 난로 옆 안락의자에 앉아있다 시뻘건 눈으로 이방인을 쳐다봤어요.
“안녕하슈,”라며 으르렁거리는 목소리로 그러면서도 사뭇 우호적인 척하며 그녀가 말했어요. “앉아 푹 쉬시다 가슈.”
그녀가 불을 더 세게 피웠어요. 그녀는 뭔가를 작은 냄비에 담아 요리를 하고 있었거든요. 
딸이 정신 차리라며 두 사람(왕자와 하인)에게 경고했어요.
“아무 것도 드시지 말고, 마시지도 마세요.”
왜냐면 그녀가 지금 사악한 음료수를 끓이고 있다는 거예요.
그들은 이른 아침까지 푹 잤어요.
그들은 출발할 준비를 하고 있었어요. 왕자님은 벌써 자기 말 위에 걸터 앉았지요.
노파가 말했어요.
“잠시만, 내 직접 작별 주 한 모금 드리리다.”
그녀가 가져오는 동안 왕자는 그냥 말을 타고 출발했어요.
다만 하인이 자기 말에 ‘안장’(말 등에 탈 때 앉는 부분)을 좀 더 메야 했어요.
그래서 사악한 마녀가 그 음료수를 들고 나왔을 때 남아 있던 유일한 사람이 그 하인이었지요.
“이걸 네 주인께 갖다 줘.”라며 그녀가 말했어요.  
하지만 바로 그때 유리잔이 깨지는 바람에 독이 말에게로 튀었다. 그 독이 너무도 강했기 때문에 말이 즉사해 넘어지고 말았다. 
하인이 주인에게 달려가 이 일을 말하였다. 하지만 하인의 말 안장을 그냥 두고 올 수 없어 다시 가서 가져와야했다.
하지만 하인이 죽은 말에게 가보니, 큰까마귀 한 마리가 벌써 말 위에 앉아 게걸스럽게 먹고 있었다. 
“재수 옴 붙었군?”라며 하인이 말했어요. 
그는 그 큰까마귀를 죽여 들고 갔어요. 
이제 그들은 온종일 숲을 여행하며 나아갔어요. 그럼에도 숲을 벗어나지 못했죠.
땅거미가 질 때쯤 그들은 여인숙 하나를 발견해 들어갔어요.
하인이 그 큰까마귀로 저녁식사를 차려달라며 여인숙주인에게 주었어요.
하지만 거긴 도둑들의 소굴이었어요. 
밤사이 12명이 도착해 이방인들을 죽이고 물건을 빼앗을 작정을 하고 있었지요.
그 작업을 하기 전 그들이 자리에 앉아 저녁식사를 했어요.
여인숙 주인과 마녀가 그들과 함께 앉았어요.
그들은 다 함께 고깃국을 한 접시씩 먹었어요. 큰까마귀의 살점이 들어간 고깃국이었지요.
그들이 한 두입 삼키자마자 푹푹 쓰러지며 죽고 말았어요.
왜냐면 말의 살점을 먹었던 그 큰까마귀가 독을 그들에게 옮겼기 때문이지요.
그리하여 집엔 여인숙주인의 딸내미 외엔 아무도 남지 않게 되었어요.
그 애는 정직했어요. 나쁜 짓에도 가담해오지 않던 아이였어요.
그녀가 이방인에게 모든 방문을 열어주며 수북이 싸여있는 보물들을 보여주었어요.
하지만 왕자는 모든 것을 그녀가 계속 간직해도 된다 말하고, 아무 것도 건드리지 않았다. 
그리곤 하인과 함께 말을 타고 여행을 출발했다. 
한참을 여행하니 도시가 하나 나왔다. 
그 도시엔 아름답지만 무척이자 도도한 공주님이 한 분 살고 계셨다. 
그녀는 자신이 알아맞히지 못하는 수수께끼를 한 가지 내는 사람만아 자신의 남편이 될 수 있다 선포한 상태였다. 
다만 그녀가 그 수수께끼를 풀 경우 그 남자의 목을 내 놓아야했다. 
그녀에겐 3일의 시간이 주어졌다. 그 안에 수수께끼를 풀면 되었다. 
하지만 그녀는 너무도 총명했기에 주어진 수수께끼를 약속 날짜보다 훨씬 일찍 죄다 알아맞추었다. 
그 때문에 죄 없는 남자구혼자들만 아홉 명이나 저승길로 갔다. 
왕자가 도착했을 때, 그만 그녀의 엄청난 미모에 눈이 멀어 기꺼이 이것에 자신의 목숨을 걸 각오가 되었다. 
그런 다음 그가 그녀에게 가 자신의 수수께끼를 내놓았다. 
“이건 무엇입니까?”라며 그가 말했다. “한 번은 하나밖에 죽지 않았는데, 또 한 번은 열둘이나 죽었다.”
그녀는 그게 뭔지 알지 못했다. 그래서 생각하고 또 생각했다. 하지만 도무지 알 길이 없었다. 
그녀가 수수께끼 책을 펼쳤다. 
하지만 거기에도 그 얘긴 없었다…. 즉 그녀의 지식이 바닥 난 거였다. 
어쩔 줄을 몰라한 그녀가 자신의 하녀를 시켜 왕자의 침실에 몰래 들어가 보게 했다. 왕자의 꿈들을 엿들으라는 것이었다. 왕자가 자다 혹 자신의 수수께끼 비밀을 털어놓을 수 있다 그녀는 여겼기 때문이다.  
하지만 영리한 하인이 자기 주인 대신 침대에 누워 있었다. 
하녀가 거길 들어오자, 그(하인)가 그녀가 입고 있던 ‘망토’(팔 부분이 없고 어깨 위에 걸쳐 있는 외투)를 벗기며 회초리로 그녀를 쫓아내버렸다.  
두 번째 날 공주는 이번엔 ‘시녀’(지체 높은 사람을 시중드는 여자. 궁녀)를 보냈다. 시녀라면 분명 엿듣는데 성골할 거라 보았기 때문이다. 
하지만 하인은 그 시녀도 또한 망토를 벗기고 회초리로 밖으로 몰아내버렸다. 
이제 세 번째 밤이니까 왕자는 자신이 안전할 거라 믿고 직접 자기 침대에 누웠다. 
그때 공주 자신이 직접 들어왔어요.
그녀는 부연(흐릿한) 회색 망토를 하나 입고 있었어요.
그녀가 왕자 곁에 앉았어요.
그녀는 왕자가 자며 꿈꾸고 있다 생각하곤 말을 걸었어요.
자면서도 대답을 할 수 있으리라 희망하고서요. 많이들 그러잖아요. 하지만 왕자는 깨어있었어요. 그래서 모든 말을 또렷이 잘 듣고 이해했죠.
그때 그녀가 물었어요.
“한 번은 하나밖에 죽지 않았다는 게 무슨 말이죠?”
그가 대답했어요.
“독약에 죽은 말의 시체를 먹은 큰까마귀가 죽었다는 뜻이오.”
그녀가 재차 물었어요.
“그럼 또 한 번은 열둘이나 죽었다니 이건 무슨 뜻이죠?”
그가 대답했어요. 
“그건 그 큰까마귀 고깃국을 먹고 죽은 열두 명의 살인자들을 말하는 겁니다.” 
그제야 그녀는 자신이 몰래 훔치려던 그 수수께끼의 비밀을 알게 되었어요.
하자만 왕자가 그녀의 망토를 하도 세게 붙드는 바람에 그녀는 그걸 놓아두고 와야 했어요.
다음날 아침 공주는 자신이 그 수수께끼를 알아맞혔다며 발표했어요.
공주는 사람을 보내 12명의 재판관들을 오게 해 그들 앞에서 그 수수께끼의 답을 설명했어요. 
하지만 그 청춘(왕자)이 자기 말 좀 들어보라며 간청하더니 말했어요.
“그녀는 밤에 제 방에 몰래 들어와 질문했습니다. 그렇지 않았더라면 그녀는 몰랐을 겁니다.”
재판관들이 말했어요.
“증거를 대시오.”
그때 그의 하인에 의해 망토 세 개가 재판관들에게 제출되었다. 
공주가 평소 입는 부연(흐릿한) 회색 망토를 본 재판관들이 말했다. 
“망토에 금실과 은실로 ‘자수’(실을 넣음)를 놓게 하시오. 이건 당신의 결혼식 망토로 사용될 것이오.”(왕자와 공주의 결혼식 때, 왕자가 착용할 망토를 말함~ㅎㅎ)


(끝)

동화 「수수께끼」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「수수께끼」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter22.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



23. 생쥐, 새, 소시지



옛날 어느 날 생쥐와 새와 ‘소시지’(먹는 소시지. 순대처럼 생긴 검푸른 독일식 소시지임)가 동무(친구)가 되어 한 집에서 살게 되었어요.
서로 의지해가며 행복하게 잘 살았답니다.
그러다 보니 재산도 조금씩 늘어났지요, 놀랍도록 요.
새가 맡은 일은 매일 숲으로 날아가 땔감을 가져오는 거였어요.
생쥐가 맡은 일은 물을 떠오고, 불을 피우고, 식탁을 놓는 일이었지요.
그러니 요리는 소시지의 몫이 되었어요.
하지만 너무 유복하다보면 새로운 뭔가를 바라기 마련이에요.
그러던 어느 날 새가 도중에 다른 새를 만났어요.
서로 자기 신세가 최고라며 뽐을 냈지요.
그런데 다른 새가 “너 ‘숙맥’(=바보)이니, 맨날 힘든 일만 하게. 집에 두 녀석들은 잘 지낸다며. 불을 피우고 물만 떠오면 되잖아, 그럼 생쥐는 식탁을 내놓을 때까진 자기 방에서 놀면 되는 거고. 그릇에 누워있다는 소시지는 또 어떻고. 그냥 요리가 잘 되고 있는가만 보면 되잖아. 식사시간이 가까워지면 그냥 수프나 야챗국에 지(=소시지) 몸을 한두 번 담겼다가 기어 나오면 간이 저절로 맞아지며 요리 다 되는 거 아냐.”라며 놀리지 뭐예요.
새는 집에 돌아와 그날 땔감을 내려놓았어요.
그들이 다함께 자리에 앉아 저녁식사를 했어요.
각자 식사를 다 마친 후, 다음날 아침까지 푹 잤지요, 이건 정말 더할 나위 없는 삶이었지요.
밤새 다른 새의 말에 심사가 뒤틀린 그 새가 다음 날 자기는 숲으로 가 더는 땔감을 주워오지 않겠다는 거예요.
“난 그동안 속아왔어. 종처럼 일해 왔다고. 모두들 날 바보라고 놀려. 그러니 이번 한 번만 일을 바꿔보자. 각자 다른 애의 일을 해보는 거야.”
이 뜻밖의 말에 생쥐와 소시지가 사정하며 달래보았지만 새는 막무가내였어요.
“난 정말이지 지쳤다고!”
그리하여 세 명은 제비뽑기를 하게 되었고요, 소시지가 땔감 나르는 일을 맡게 되었고요, 생쥐는 요리를 맡고, 새는 물을 떠오는 일을 맡게 되었어요.
무슨 일이 벌어졌냐고요?
깽판 났죠!
맛있는 소시지가 숲으로 출발하자, 작은 새도 불을 붙였어요. 그리고 생쥐는 냄비 옆에 머물며 소시지가 땔감을 주워 집에 올 때까지 혼자 기다렸어요.
하지만 맛있는 소시지를 아무리 기다려도 돌아오질 않는 거예요.
두 친구들은 무슨 사고를 당했나 싶어 걱정이 되기 시작했어요.
그래서 새가 뭔 일인지 살펴보려고 날아가 보았어요.
하지만 멀리 가지 않아 새는, 합법적인 노획물로 불쌍한 소시지를 덮친 개 한 마리를 길에서 만났어요.
그 개가 소시지를 붙잡아 먹어 치워버린 거였어요.
새는 “짐승의 얼굴을 하고 이 무슨 날강도 짓이에요!”라며 그 개를 마구 비난했어요.
하지만 헛수고였지요.
왜냐면 그 개가 말하길,
“그 소시지에 가짜 상표가 박혀 있기에 그 애 인생을 몰수해 버린 거뿐이야.”
라고 했으니까요.
새가 비통한 심정으로 다시 날아 집으로 돌아와 친구에게 자신이 보고 들은 바를 다 말해주었어요.
그들은 불편하지만 그래도 함께 계속 잘 살아보자며 동의했어요.
그리하여 새는 식탁 위에 천(식탁보)을 펼쳐 놓고, 생쥐는 음식을 준비하며 간을 맞추기 위해 소시지가 늘 그랬듯 냄비 속에 한 번 들어가 자기 몸을 야채와 비비고 구르고 나올 마음이었어요.
하지만 그녀(생쥐)는 그 속에 들어가자마자 뜨거운 물에 피부와 머리카락이 떨어져나가며 즉사하고 말았어요. 
새가 저녁식사를 들러(먹으러) 집으로 돌아와 보니, 그 어디에도 요리사 안 보이는 거예요.
걱정이 돼서 새가 땔감을 이리 저리 던지며 친구의 이름을 불러도 보고 찾아도 보았지만 아무리 해도 요리사를 찾을 수가 없었어요!
게다가 설상가상으로 새가 무주의하게 땔감을 던지는 바람에 나무에 불이 붙었고, 큰 화재가 나고 말았어요.
새가 허겁지겁 물을 떠오려 나갔어요. 그러다 자기 발톱에서 양동이가 우물 속으로 떨어지고 말았어요.
그 바람에 새도 그 양동이와 같이 넘어졌다가 두 번 다시 자세를 바로 잡지 못하고 그 길로 황천길로 가고 말았어요. 익사(물에 빠짐)한 거지요. 


(끝)

동화 「생쥐, 새, 소시지」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「생쥐, 새, 소시지」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter23.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



24. 홀레 할머니 (=풍요의 여신)


■ 미리알림

홀레 : 여신 이름이 ‘홀레’에요. 게르만 신화에 나오는 풍요의 여신이름임. 결혼할 때 ‘혼’례 아님. ^^ 
그런데... 지금 든 생각인데... 왜 풍요의 여신이 할머니지...-_-;; 살짝 멘붕... 왠지 이번 동화 해석이 살짝 산으로 갈 거 같음...에구
(위키미디어) ‘홀레 아주머니’ 사진링크 ▶ https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Vrouw_Holle.JPG?uselang=ko (검색일자 : 2016-12-25)


(분문 시작)


홀레 할머니 (=풍요의 여신)


옛날에 두 딸을 둔 과부 한 명이 살고 있었어요…
한 딸은 무척 예쁘고 성실했어요. 반면 다른 딸은 게으르고 못생겼어요.
하지만 과부는 둘 중 게으르고 못생긴 딸을 더 좋아했답니다. 왜긴요, 그 애가 자신의 친딸이었기 때문이지요.
반대로 다른 딸인, 의붓딸은 모든 집안일을 다 하게 했어요. 아시잖아요, 신데렐라처럼요.
이 불쌍한 소녀는 매일 큰길에 있는 우물가 옆에 앉아 모든 손가락들에서 피가 날 때까지 실을 만들고 또 만들어야했어요.
그러다 하루는 직조기(실 만드는 기계) ‘셔틀’(=북=배처럼 생긴 거. 셔틀 사진과 설명이 있는 블로그 링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/twN3yZ )에 피가 튀었어요. 그래서 그녀는 그걸 우물에 담그고 핏자국을 씻어내려다 그만 손에서 셔틀을 놓치는 바람에 셔틀이 우물 바닥에 떨어졌어요.
그녀가 울며 새엄마에게 달려가 그 불운을 얘기했어요.
하지만 새엄마는 그녀를 무섭게 나무라며 매정하게 이렇게 말했어요.
“니가 떨어뜨려놓고 어디서 하소연이야, 당장 다시 찾아오지 못해.”
그래서 소녀는 우물로 다시 갔어요.
하지만 어찌해야할지 몰랐어요.
슬픔을 참지 못한 그녀가 셔틀(직조기의 북)을 다시 찾으러 우물 속으로 뛰어들었어요.
그러다 정신을 잃고 말았지요.
그녀가 깨 다시 정신을 차리고 보니, 그녀는 햇살이 환하게 내리쬐고 수천가지 꽃들이 자라고 있는 사랑스런 풀밭에 누워 있었어요.
이 풀밭 길을 따라 가니 마침내 빵집의 오븐이 나오고, 그 오븐 안엔 빵들이 가득 들어 있었어요.
그 빵들이 소리쳤어요.
“오, 저희들 좀 꺼내주세용! 제발요! 다 탈 거 같단 말예요! 너무 오래 구워졌어용!” 
그래서 그녀가 가 빵들을 ‘빵 샵’을 이용해 하나씩 다 꺼내주었어요.
그런 다음 그녀가 계속 더 가니 사과들이 주렁주렁 매달린 나무가 한 그루 나왔어요.
그 나무의 사과들이 그녀를 보자 외쳤어요.
“오, 우리좀 흔들어주세용! 흔들어요! 우리 사과들이 다 익었거든용!”
그래서 그녀가 그 나무를 흔들어주었어요. 사과들은 비가 오듯 떨어졌어요. 소녀는 마지막 사과 하나까지 다 흔들어 떨어뜨린 다음, 그 사과들을 차곡차곡 모아 한 쪽에 쌓아놓은 다음, 다시 가던 길을 계속 걸어갔어요.
마침내 예쁜 집이 한 채 나왔어요.
노파가 밖을 엿보고 있는 집이었어요.
그런데 그 노파가 어찌나 큰 이빨들을 가졌던지, 소녀는 덜컥 겁이 나 막 달아나려던 참이었어요. 
그때 그 노파가 소녀에게 소리쳤어요.
”뭐가 무섭니, 얘야? 나랑 살자구나. 네가 집안 일만 잘 맡아 해준다면, 네가 살만할 게다. 내 잠자리를 정돈해주고 깃털이 날릴 때까지 이불만 잘 털어주면 된다… 그래야 지상에서 눈이 내리걸랑. 난 ‘홀레 할머니’(풍요의 여신. 게르만 신화)란다.“
그 노파는 무척이나 상냥하게 말했어요. 그래서 소녀도 용기를 내고 그녀의 집안일을 해주는데 동의를 했답니다.
소녀는 모든 일을 참 똑 부러지게 잘 해냈어요. 그래서 안주인도 만족했지요.
소녀는 침대 이불도 퍽퍽 잘 털었어요. 그래서 깃털들이 사방에 눈송이 마냥 날리었지요.
소녀는 홀레 할머니와의 삶이 더없이 행복했어요. 할머니는 화도 절대 안 내시고요, 매일 소녀에게 삶은 고기나 구운 고기들을 먹으라고 주셨어요. 
소녀는 한동안 홀레 할머니와 살았어요.
그런데 차츰 슬퍼지는 거에요.
기뿐데 왜 슬플까요? 
마침내 소녀는 그게 일종의 향수병(집이 그리움)이란 걸 알아챘어요.
비록 여기가 집보다 수천 배는 더 좋았지만, 자꾸 집이 그리워지는 걸 그녀도 어찌할 수 없었어요.
결국 소녀가 할머니에게 말했어요.
“집에 돌아가고 싶어요. 여기 내려와 잘 지냈지만. 더는 있을 수 없을 거 같아서요. 저의 사람들에게로 다시 가봐야 할 거 같아요.”
홀레 할머니가 말했어요.
“네가 집을 다시 그리워한다니 그 참 기뿐 소식이구나. 그동안 충실히 일해주었으니 내 너를 다시 데려다 놓으마.”
그 후 즉시 할머니가 소녀의 손을 잡아 커다란 문 앞으로 이끌었어요.
그 문은 열려있었고, 처녀는 그 문 바로 아래쪽에 서 있었는데, 갑자기 묵직한 황금 비가 내리더니 덕지덕지 그녀에게 달라붙는 거예요.
그래서 소녀는 황금으로 완전히 덮이게 되었어요.
“네 근면함에 대한 보상이다.”라며 홀레 할머니가 말했어요.
그와 동시에 할머니가 소녀에게 우물 바닥에 떨어졌던 셔틀(직조기의 북)을 돌려주었어요.
그 후 즉시 문이 닫혔는데, 눈을 떠보곤 자신이 새엄마 집에서 그리 멀지 않은 곳에 있다는 걸 알았어요.
소녀가 안마당으로 뛰어들 때, 우물가 옆에 서 있던 수탉이 노래를 불렀어요…
“꼬끼오 꼬꼬(수탉 울음소리)! 황금 소녀가 돌아왔다네!”
소녀가 새엄마에게 갔어요.
소녀는 황금으로 온통 뒤덮인 가운데 도착한 거라 새엄마와 ‘의붓자매’(새엄마가 데리고 온 딸)에게 대환영을 받았어요.
소녀는 그동안의 일을 그녀들에게 죄다 말해주었어요.
새엄마는 그녀가 어떻게 부자가 되었는지 듣게 되자마자 자신의 못생기고 게으른 친딸에게도 똑같은 행운을 가지게 해주고 싶어 안달이 났어요.
다음날 당장 새엄마는 자신의 친딸보고 우물가 옆에 자리를 잡고 앉아 실을 만들게 했어요.
친딸은 자신의 셔플(직조기의 북)을 피로 얼룩을 묻히기 위해 자기 손으로 ‘가시나무 덤불’을 때려 손가락을 가시에 찔리게 했어요.
그런 다음 그녀는 셔틀을 우물에 내던졌어요. 그 뒤를 이어 곧바로 그녀가 몸을 던졌어요.  
의붓자매의 경우처럼, 그녀도 아름다운 풀밭에 왔어요. 그런 다음 같은 길을 따라 쭉 걸었지요.
그녀가 오븐에 도착해보니 빵들이 아우성치고 있었어요.
“오, 우리 좀 꺼내주세용! 제발용! 그렇지 않음 저희 정말 다 타요! 저흰 너무 오래 구워졌어용!”
하지만 게으른 대답이 돌아왔어요.
“내가 왜 내 손을 더럽혀야하는데?”
그런 다음 그녀가 계속 걸었어요.
곧 그녀는 그 사과나무에 도착했어요.
사과들이 아우성쳤어요.
“오, 흔들어주세용! 저희를 흔들어주세용! 저희 사과들은 다 익었어용!”
하지만 그녀가 대답했어요.
“나보고! 그러다 내 손에 떨어지면 어쩌려고.”
그런 다음 그녀가 계속 걸어갔어요.
홀레 할머니(게르만 신화 속의 풍요의 여신. 게르만=독일) 댁에 도착한 그녀는 전혀 무섭지가 않았어요. 왜냐면 그녀가 큰 이빨들을 가지고 있다는 걸 이미 들었기 때문이죠. 
소녀는 직접 나서서 할머니를 위해 일하겠다 말했어요.
첫째 날 소녀가 무척 애를 쓰며 열심히 일했어요. 홀레 할머니가 어떤 걸 시키면 잘 따랐고요. 소녀의 머릿속은 온통 할머니가 보상으로 줄 황금 생각뿐이었거든요.
하지만 둘째 날이 되자 소녀는 게을러지기 시작했어요.
셋째 날이 되자 이건 뭐 막 가자는 식으로 게을러졌어요.  
그 다음부턴 소녀는 아침에 일어나지 않았어요.
소녀는 홀레 할머니 침대 정돈도 안 했고요, 이불을 털어 깃털이 날리게도 하지 않았어요.
홀레 할머니도 곧 지쳤어요. 그래서 소녀에게 그만 떠나줄 것을 통보했지요.
게으른 소녀는 기꺼이 그러겠노라 말했어요. 이제 황금비가 우수수 내릴 걸 기대하면서요.
홀레 할머니는 소녀를 데리고 큰 문으로 갔어요.
하지만 소녀가 그 문 아래쪽에 서 있는 동안, 황금 대신 ‘역청’(액체 석유)이 큰 솥 채 소녀에게로 쏟아 부어졌어요.
“그게 네 수고에 대한 보상이다.”라며 홀레 할머니가 말하며 그 문을 쾅 닫아버렸어요.
그리하여 게으른 소녀는 집으로 돌아오게 되었어요.
하지만 ‘역청’(액체 석유)을 잔득 뒤집어쓰고 왔지요.
우물가에 있던 수탉이 소녀를 보자마자 노래불렀어요…
“꼬끼오 꼬꼬(수탉 울음소리)! 소녀가 역청을 뒤집어쓰고 돌아왔네!”
하지만 그 역청은 소녀의 몸에 아주 단단히 달라붙었어요. 그리고 그녀가 살아가는 동안 절대 떨어지지 않았답니다.


(끝)

동화 「홀레 할머니(풍요의 여신)」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「홀레 할머니(풍요의 여신)」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter24.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



25. 일곱 마리 까마귀



옛날에 일곱 아들을 둔 아빠가 살고 있었어요.
그에겐 딸이 없었죠, 그때까진요.
비록 딸이 있음 하고 많이 바랐지만요.
그러다 마침내 아내가 아이를 가졌는데 낳고 보니 딸아이였어요.
기쁨이 샘솟았어요. 하지만 아가가 너무 약하고 조그만 했어요. 아가가 너무 허약해 세례를 받지 못하고 곧 죽을까 염려된 아빠가 개인자격으로 세례를 하기로 결심했어요.(아빠가 걱정하는 것→세례를 받지 못하고 죽으면 아기라도 천국엘 못 감. 연옥에 감. 연옥=‘천국 전 단계’. 종교를 믿지 않았던 착한 사람들이 가는 곳이 연옥. 단테의 『신곡』에서 읽었음)
아빠가 소년(아들)들 중 한 명에게 빨리 가서 세례에 쓸 물을 떠오라 시켰어요.
나머지 6명의 소년들도 덩달아 같이 갔어요. 그러다 서로 자기가 물을 퍼겠다고 하다 항아리를 우물 속에 빠뜨리고 말았어요.
소년들은 서서 어찌할 바를 몰랐어요. 감히 집에 갈 엄두도 내지 못했고요.
심부름 보낸 아이들이 계속해서 돌아오지 않자 아빠가 안절부절 못해 말했어요.
“이것들이 또 논다고 심부름하는 걸 까먹은 모양이네, 이 저주받을 놈들!”
세례도 받지 못하고 죽게 될 딸아이가 걱정돼 아빠는 정말이지 죽을 판이었어요.
분을 차지 못한 아빠가 외쳤어요.
“이 자식들 죄다 까마귀로 변해버리라지.”
그가 그 말을 내뱉자마자 하늘에서 날개들이 “푸드덕! 푸드덕!”거리는 소리가 들려 올려다보니 ‘칠흑 같은’(새까만) 까마귀(원문→큰까마귀)들이 날아가고 있었어요. 
부모는 그 저주를 되돌릴 수 없었어요.
일곱 아들을 잃은 슬픔이 컸지만, 그나마 다행인 게 눈에 넣어도 안 아플 것 같은 딸아이가 곧 건강을 회복하고 나날이 예쁘장하게 커갔다는 거예요.
오랜 시간이 지난 후 그녀는 자기에게 오빠들이 있었다는 사실을 몰랐어요. 부모님께서 딸아이 앞에서 오빠 얘기를 할까 정말 조심하셨기 때문이죠. 
그러던 어느 날 그녀는 우연히 어떤 사람들이 그녀에 대해 수군거리는 소리를 듣게 되었어요.
“저 애 참말로 예쁘네, 하지만 자기 때문에 일곱 오빠들이 저주에 걸렸다는 걸 알까.” 
그녀는 고민을 많이 했어요.
그런 다음 아빠 엄마에게 가, 자신에게 오빠가 있었다는 게 과연 사실인지 그럼 그 오빠들은 다 어떻게 된 건지를 여쭈었어요.
부모님도 더는 비밀을 숨길 수가 없었어요. 그래서 그녀의 오빠들에게 닫친 건 다 하늘의 뜻이었다 말하고 절대 그 일과 그녀의 출생하고는 아무런 연관이 없다 설명하고 또 설명했어요.
하지만 처녀는 그것에 대해 깊이 생각해보고 자신이 오빠들을 구해야겠다고 결심하기에 이르렀어요. 
그녀는 몰래 출발을 하고 나서야 비로소 마음의 안정과 평안이 찾아온 걸 느꼈어요.
오빠들의 흔적을 찾아내 그들을 자유롭게 해주기 위해 그녀는 드넓은 세상을 향해 나아갔던 거예요. 어떤 희생도 마다하지 않고서요.
다만 그녀는 작은 반지 하나를 챙겨 갔는데, 그건 부모님의 ‘정표’(간절한 마음을 나타내는 기념품)였어요. 그리고 배고픔을 해결해줄 빵 덩어리 하나랑 목마름을 해결해줄 작은 물주전자 하나 그리고 지칠 때 앉을 작은 의자 하나만 챙겨 떠났답니다.
그녀는 계속 앞으로 나아갔어요. 멀리, 멀리, 세상 끝 저 멀리까지요.
그러다 해에게 도착했지요. 하지만 해는 너무 뜨거워 끔찍했어요. 그리고 귀여운 아이들을 잡아먹어요. 그래서 그녀가 허겁지겁 해에게서 도망쳐 달에게로 갔어요. 그런데 달은 너무 너무 차갑고 두렵고 심술이 심했어요, 게다가 달이 그 아이를 보자 말하길,
“음, 음, 인간의 신선한 살 냄새가 나는 걸.”
라고 하지 뭐에요.
이번에도 그녀는 재빨리 달아나 별님들에게로 갔어요.
별님들은 그녀에게 친절하고 상냥하게 대해주었어요.
그들 중 한 별님이 자신의 예쁜 의자를 그녀에게 내주었어요.
때마침 잠자리에서 일어난 새벽별님이 그녀에게 닭다리를 주며 말했어요.
“유리 산에 도착하면 이 닭다리로 열려 무나, 네 오빠들은 그 유리 산에 있단다.”
처녀가 그 닭다리를 받아 보자기 속에 잘 챙겼어요.
그런 다음 소녀는 다시 앞으로 나아가고 또 나아가 결국 그 유리 산에 도착하고 말았어요.
정말 문이 닫혀 있었어요.
그래서 그녀는 자기가 닭다리를 들고 왔다는 사실을 기억해냈죠.
하지만 그녀가 보자기를 펼쳤을 땐 아뿔싸 텅 비어있었어요, 새벽별님의 선물을 잃어버린 거예요.
이제 그녀는 어찌해야할까요?
오빠들을 구하고 싶은데, 그 유리 산에 들어갈 열쇠가 없는 걸요.
마음이 고운 여동생은 나이프(칼)을 꺼냈어요. 그걸로 자신의 조그마한 손가락들 중 하나를 잘랐어요. 그걸 문에 끼우니 성공적으로 문이 열렸어요.
그녀가 안으로 들어가자, 작은 난쟁이 한 명이 다가와 그녀를 맞이했어요. 
그가 말했어요.
“우리 애기, 누굴 찾고 있니?”
“일곱 마리 까마귀가 된, 제 오빠들을 찾고 있어요.”라고 그녀가 대답했어요.
그 난쟁이가 말했어요.
“까마귀 주인님들께서는 지금 출타중이시다, 하지만 너는 여기 머물며 그 분들이 올 때까지 있어도 돼, 안으로 들어오렴.”
그 후 즉시 작은 난쟁이가, 일곱 개의 예쁘장한 접시들과, 일곱 개의 작은 유리잔들 안에 까마귀들이 먹을 식사를 담아왔어요. 
착한 여동생은 각 접시들에서 한 입씩만 먹었어요. 그리곤 각 유리잔들에서 한 모금씩만 마셨어요.
다만 마지막 작은 유리잔엔 그녀가 품고 온 부모님의 징표인 반지를 떨어뜨려놓았지요.
그때 갑자기 공중에서 푸드덕 푸드덕 거리는 날갯짓들 소리가 들려왔어요.
그때 작은 난쟁이가 말했어요.
“까마귀 주인님들께서 집으로 날아오고 계셔.”
그런 다음 그들이 도착했어요. 맛있는 식사를 먹고 마실 기대들을 하면서 자신들의 작은 접시와 유리잔들을 들여다보았지요.
그때 서로 서로 한 마디씩 했어요.
“어, 누가 내 접시에서 좀 먹은 거 같은데? 내 작은 유리잔에서도 조금 마신 거 같아? 이건 인간의 입인데.”
그때 일곱 번째 까마귀가 유리잔에 든 걸 다 마시다 그만 그 반지가 입에 땡그랑 하고 겉돌고 말았어요.
그 반지를 본 그는 그게 자기 아빠와 엄마의 징표인 반지란 것을 깨닫곤 말했어요.
“하느님이시여, 우리 여동생이 여기 있다면 저희를 자유롭게 해주옵소서!”
그때 문 뒤에 숨어 상황을 지켜보며 서 있던 그 아가씨가 그 바람을 듣고서 앞으로 나오자, 모든 까마귀들이 다시 원래 인간의 모습으로 다시 돌아갔어요.
그리하여 그들은 서로 얼싸안고 키스를 서로에게 해주며 즐겁게 집으로 돌아갔답니다.


(끝)

동화 「일곱 마리 까마귀」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「일곱 마리 까마귀」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter25.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



26. 빨간 모자


■ 미리 알림
샤를 페로(프랑스 작가)의 동화든, 아니면 그림 형제(독일 작가)의 동화든, 이미 백 년 전 책이거니와, 동화의 내용이 우리나라 사람들의 정서(디즈니에서 나온 백설공주 같은 분위기)에 안 맞는 게 많습니다. 
오래전 내용이다 보니 동화라기보다는 성경의 구약성서 느낌(잔인한데 교훈적이고 재밌음)이 많이 납니다.
그래서 처음 이들 동화집을 읽으면 좋고 나쁨을 떠나, 기분이 안 좋아질 수 있습니다. 이 점 주의 바랍니다.


(소설 시작)

동화제목 : 빨간 모자

(본문시작)

옛날 옛적에 바라보는 사람들 마다 모두들 사랑스러워마지 않는 한 귀여운 여자 어린아이가 살았어요.
그러니 소녀의 할머니 눈엔 얼마나 귀여웠겠어요, 하지만 할머닌 소녀에게 줄 것이, ‘붉은 벨벳’(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/VYiGDT )으로 만든 작은 모자 하나 밖에 없었어요.
어찌나 모자가 소녀에게 딱 맞는지, 소녀는 그 모자만 쓰고 다녔어요.
그래서 사람들은 그 여자 어린아이를 가리켜 “빨간 모자”라고 불렀답니다. 
어느 날 하루는 엄마가 소녀에게 말했어요.
“이리 온, 빨간 모자야, 여기 케이크 한 조각이랑 포도주 한 병을 담아 놨다. 이걸 할머니께 전달해드리고 오거라. 할머니가 아프시니 많이 허약해져 계실 테니, 이 음식들이 큰 도움이 되실 거다. 무더워지기 전에 출발해라, 조심조심 걷고 한 눈 팔다 길에서 벗어나지 말고. 안 그럼 케이크가 땅바닥에 떨어지거나 포도주 병이 깨질 수도 있을 테고 그렇게 되면 할머닌 아무 것도 못 드시게 될 테니까. 할머니 방에 들어갈 땐 ‘안녕하세요~’라고 인사 건네는 거 꼭 잊지 말고, 인사드리기 전까진 여기 저기 함부로 엿보면 안 된다.”
“응 조심해서 갖다 드릴께.”라며 빨간 모자가 엄마에게 대답한 후 음식들을 건네받았어요.
할머닌 마을에서 2.4(이 점 사. 어른 걸음으로 36분 정도 걸리는 거리)킬로미터 떨어진 숲에 살고 계셨어요.
빨간 모자가 막 숲에 들어서려는데 늑대 한 마리가 나타났어요.
빨간 모자는 늑대가 참 사악한 동물이란 걸 잘 몰랐기 때문에 그를 만난 것에 별 두려움이 없었어요.
“안녕, 빨간 모자야.”라며 늑대가 말했어요.
“감사합니다. 늑대 씨.”
“이른 아침부터 어디를 그렇게 가니, 빨간 모자야?”
“할머니 댁에요.”
“그 앞치마엔 뭐가 들었니?”
“케이크랑 포도주요. 어제가 빵 만드는 날이었는데, 할머니가 너무 편찮으셔서 오늘 이렇게 든든히 드실 수 있도록 음식을 챙겨가는 거예요.” 
“네 할머니는 어디에 사시니, 빨간 모자야?”
“숲으로 1킬로미터(어른 걸음으로 15분 거리)만 쭉 가면 돼요. 왜, 큰 참나무(원문→오크나무) 세 그루 있는 곳에 집이 한 채 있잖아요, 개암나무 바로 아래 말에요, 거기 사세요. 잘 아시지 않나요.”라고 빨간 모자가 대답했다.  
늑대가 혼자 생각했다. 
‘요것 봐라! 군침이 도는데… 나이 많은 쪽을 잡아먹는 거보단 이쪽이 낫겠어. 능청맞게 행동해서 둘 다 잡아먹어야겠다.’
그래서 늑대는 빨간 모자 옆에서 잠시 걸으며 이렇게 말했다.
“빨간 모자야 이 꽃 좀 봐봐, 이 주변에 얼마나 예쁜 꽃들이 많니… 좀 둘러보고 가지 않으련? 지금 작은 새들이 노래하는 것도 네겐 안 들린단 말이니. 마치 학교 가듯 진지하게만 걷고 있지 않니, 하지만 여기 이 숲 모든 것들이 즐길 만 하단다.” 
빨간 모자가 눈을 들자, 나무 가지 사이로 여기저기에서 햇볕이 내리쬐는 것과 예쁜 꽃들이 모든 곳에서 자라고 있는 것이 보였어요. 
빨간 모자가 생각했어요.
‘신선한 꽃다발을 할머니께 가져다드리면 할머니도 기뻐하실 거야. 이른 시간이니 아직 내게 시간이 좀 있어.’
그래서 빨간 모자는 숲으로 가는 길에서 벗어나 잠시 꽃을 골랐더랬다. 
빨간 모자가 한 송이 꽃을 고를 때마다 더 예쁜 꽃이 좀 더 앞쪽에서 보였고 그래서 거리로 가 꽃을 꺾다보니 빨간 모자는 점점 더 깊이 숲으로 들어가고야 말았다. 
한편 늑대는 곧장 할머니 댁으로 달려가 문을 두드렸다. 
“거기 누구니?”
“빨간 모자에요.”라며 늑대가 말했다. “케이크와 포도주를 가지고 왔어요. 문을 열어주세요.”
“걸쇠(‘ㄱ’자 모양의 쇠)를 들어 올리면 된다.”라며 할머니가 애써 큰 소리로 말했어요. “난 몸이 너무 약해져서 내 힘으론 못 들어 올린단다.”
늑대가 ‘걸쇠’(‘ㄱ’자 모양의 쇠)를 들어 올려 문을 벌컥 열고는 한 마디 말도 없이 곧장 할머님이 누워 계시는 침대로 가 그녀를 꿀컥 집어삼켜버렸다. 
그런 다음 늑대는 할머니의 옷을 입고 할머니의 모자를 쓴 다음 침대에 누운 다음 커튼을 쳐버렸다(방이 어두어짐). 
어쨌든 이 시각 빨간 모자는 이리저리 뛰어다니며 꽃을 꺾다보니 이젠 너무 많은 꽃을 꺾는 바람에 더는 더 손에 쥘 수가 없게 되자, 문득 할머님이 어제부터 아무것도 못 드신 걸 생각해내고는 다시 할머니 댁으로 출발했다. 
빨간 모자가 작은 집(할머니 집)을 발견하곤 깜짝 놀랬다. 왜냐면 문이 열러 있었기 때문이다. 
더구나 할머니 방에 들어서자 뭔가 낯선 느낌이 드어 저도 모르게 혼잣말로 중얼거렸다. 
“오 이런! 오늘은 정말 편찮으신 모양이네. 평소 할머니와 있을 때랑은 느낌이 많이 달라.”
빨간 모자가 큰 소리로 말했다. 
“안녕하세요.”
하지만 돌아오는 대답은 없었다. 
그래서 빨간 모자가 침대로 가 커튼을 제꼈더니.
할머니가 취침용 모자를 얼굴까지 내려누르고는 아주 낯선 표정을 하고서 누워계신 것이 아닌가. 
“아! 할머니,”라며 빨간 모자가 말했다. “귀가 왜 이렇게 커지셨나요!”
“그건 네 목소리를 더 잘 듣기 위해서란다, 얘야.”라는 대답이 돌아왔어요.
“하지만, 할머니, 눈도 이렇게 커셨나요!”라며 빨간 모자가 말했다. 
“그건 네 모습을 더 잘 보기 위해서란다, 얘야.”
“하지만, 할머니, 손이 어쩜 이리도 크세요!”
“그건 너를 더 잘 안기 위해서란다.”
“아! 하지만, 할머니, 입이 어쩜 그리 끔찍하게 크세요!”
“그건 너를 더 빨리 잡아먹기 위해서지!”
늑대는 이렇게 말하고는 눈 깜짝할 사이에 냉큼 침대에서 일어나 빨간 모자에게 달려들어 삼켜버렸다. 
배운 채운 늑대가 도로 침대에 눕더니 깊은 잠에 빠져서는 코까지 아주 심하게 골기 시작했다. 
때마침 이 집(빨간 모자의 할머니 집)을 지나가던 사냥꾼이 이것을 보고 혼자 생각했다. 
“할머니가 저리고 코를 고시다니! 뭐 필요한 거라도 없으신지 살펴봐드려야겠는걸.”
그래서 방으로 들어온 사냥꾼이 침대에 다가갔을 때 늑대가 그 자리에 누워 있는 것을 보게 되었다. 
“네 놈이 여기 있었구나, 이 벼락 맞을 놈!”라며 사냥꾼이 말했다. “내 너를 오랫동안 찾아다녔다!”
그런 다음 사냥꾼이 늑대를 향해 막 총을 발사하려다, 문득 혹시 늑대가 할머니를 집어삼킨 건 아닌지 만약 그렇다면 자신이 할머니를 살릴 수 있지 않을지, 그럼으로 일단 총은 쏘면 안 되겠고 해서, 가위를 가져와 잠들어 있는 늑대의 배를 가르기 시작했다. 
사냥꾼이 두 번 가위질로 싹둑 늑대의 배를 갈랐을 때, 빨간 모자(사람이 아니라 머리에 쓰는 모자를 말함)가 빛나고 있는 것이 보였고, 다시 두 번 더 가위질로 싹둑 늑대의 배를 더 갈랐을 때, 작은 소녀가 쑥 튀어나오며 울면서 말했다. 
“앙, 넘 무서웠어요! 늑대의 배 안은 너무 깜깜해요.”
나이 지그하신 할머니 한 분까지 마저 끄집어내어 간신히 되살린 이후였다. 
빨간 모자가 재빨리 큼지막한 돌들을 가져다가 늑대의 몸을 채웠다. 
늑대는 깨어났을 때 엄청 달아나고 싶었다. 하지만 마음과 달리 몸속의 돌들 때문에 곧바로 심하게 자빠지는 바람에 죽고 말았다. 
그렇게 되자 세 명(할머니, 빨간 모자, 사냥꾼) 모두 너무 기뻤어요.
사냥꾼은 늑대의 가죽을 벗겨 자기 집으로 가지고 갔고요.
할머니는 빨간 모자(손녀)가 가지고 온 케이크랑 포도주를 맛나게 드시고 건강을 다시 회복하셨답니다.
그래서 빨간 모자는 혼자 속으로 생각했답니다.
“앞으론 절대 ‘길’(바른 길. 정도)에서 벗어나 숲으로 들어가지 않을 테야, 그리고 엄마가 하지 말라는 건 절대 안 해야지.”
* * * * * * *
(위에 있는 별표* 7개는 영어원문에 있는 겁니다. 아마도 시간의 경과를 나타내는 거 같습니다.)
또 한 번은 이런 일이 있었답니다.
이번에도 빨간 모자(할머니의 손녀)가 연로하신 할머니를 위해 케이크를 갖다 드리고 걸어가고 있는데, 또 다른 늑대 한 마리가 그녀에게 다가와 말을 걸며 길에서 벗어나게 하려고 꾀는 거예요.
하지만 이번엔 빨간 모자도 작심을 하고서 자신을 방어하며 곧장 할머니 댁으로 가,
“방금 늑대를 만났어요.”라는 말과 “안녕하세요.”라는 말을 동시에 하였더랍니다.
확실히 그랬어요. 만약 빨간 모자가 대낮에 큰길에 있지 않았더라면 나쁜 늑대가 그녀를 한 입에 꿀꺽 삼켜버리고 말았을 거예요.
“이번엔,”이라며 할머니께서 말했답니다. “우리가 문을 닫고 있을 테니, 늑대가 함부로 집안으로 들어오진 못할 게다.”라고요.
그 후 곧 늑대가 문을 두드리며 소리쳤어요.
“문 열어주세요, 할머니, 저는 빨간 모자예요, 할머니에게 케이크를 가져다드리려고 왔어요.”라고요.
하지만 할머니와 빨간 모자(손녀)는 아무런 대꾸도 하지 않았거니와 또한 문도 절대 열어주지 않았어요.
이렇게 되자 이 능구렁탱이(늑대)는 집 주변을 두 세 번 살피며 돌더니 결국엔 지붕으로 냉큼 뛰어올라 빨간 모자가 저녁이 돼서 집으로 돌아가기만을 기다렸다가 뒤따라가 어둠 속에서 빨간 모자를 냉큼 삼켜버리려고 작정하고 있었어요.
할머니는 이런 늑대의 꿍꿍이속을 다 들여다보고 계셨어요.
때마침 집 입구 쪽에 돌로 된 큰 물통이 하나 놓여 있었어요, 그래서 할머니는 빨간 모자(손녀)에게 말했어요.
“그 바가지(양동이)를 들거라, 빨간 모자야. 내가 어제 소시지를 몇 개 만들어 놓은 게 있으니. 넌 내가 끓여 주는 소시지 국물을 떠다가 집 앞 물통 속에다 붓거라.”  
빨간 모자는 물통에 끓는 물이 꽉 찰 때까지 계속 퍼 날랐어요.
그러자 소시시 국물 냄새가 지붕 위에 있던 늑대의 코에까지 들어가기 시작했어요. 
그래서 늑대가 코를 킁킁 거리며 아래쪽에서 뭔 일이 벌어지나 하고 내려다보기 시작했고요. 그러다 결국엔 자세를 지붕에 고정하고 있을 수 없을 정도까지 목을 아래쪽으로 길게 내뻗는 바람에 발이 미끄러지기 시작했고 지붕 위에서 곧장 떨어져 집 앞에 있던 돌로 된 큰 물통 속에 풍덩 빠져 익사하고 말았답니다. 물통 속에는 끓는 물이 있었잖아요.
그리하여 우리의 빨간 모자는 이번에도 아주 기뻐하며 집으로 돌아갈 수 있었고, 이 일이 있은 이후론 어느 누구도 빨간 모자를 해코지를 하지 않았답니다. 

(끝)

동화 「빨간 모자」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「빨간 모자」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter26.html  

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



27. 브레멘의 동물 음악대


■ 브레멘은 어디?

독일 북부의 시 이름(=브레멘 주의 주도임)
▼ 네이버 지도
https://www.google.co.kr/maps?ie=UTF-8&q=53.07929619999999,8.8016937 (구글지도. 검색일자 : 2016-12-27)

■ 동상(조각상)은?
▼ 유명한 브레멘 음악대 동상 사진 링크 ('먀니'님의 네이버블로그 링크)
사진 링크 ▶ http://kmh8213.blog.me/220819595928 



(분문 시작)


브레멘의 동물 음악대


당나귀 주인이 있었어요.
그는 그 당나귀에 옥수수 포대기들을 싣고 수년간 방앗간까지 쉬지 않고 날랐어요.
하지만 당나귀가 나이가 들어감에 따라 점점 고된 일을 못하게 되었어요.
그러자 주인이 당나귀 사료 값이라도 아낄 마음을 가지기 시작했어요.
낌새를 눈치 챈 당나귀는 도망쳐 ‘브레멘’(독일 북부의 시 이름)으로 가는 길에 올랐어요.
“거기라면,”라며 당나귀가 생각했어요. “확실히 시(도시 할 때의 ‘시’) 음악대에 들어갈 수 있을 거야.”
좀 걸었을 때 도로에 누워 있는 사냥개 한 마리를 발견했어요. 아 글쎄 지칠 때까지 뛰길 좋아하던 그 친구가 숨이 가빠 헐떡이고 있지 뭐예요.
“왜 그렇게 숨을 헐떡이니, 덩치 큰 친구야?”라며 당나귀가 물었어요.
“아,”라며 그 사냥개가 대꾸했어요. “나도 늙었나봐. 하루하루가 예전 같지 않아. 더 이상 사냥도 못해. 그래서 내 주인이 날 죽이려하지 뭐니. 그래서 도망쳐 나왔어. 그런데 이제 어떻게 먹고 살지 앞이 깜깜하지 뭐니?”
“그럼 우리,”라며 당나귀가 말했어요. “함께 브레멘으로 가자. 거기라면 우리도 시 음악대에 들어갈 수 있을 거야. 나와 함께 가면 너도 따 놓은 당상이야. 난 ‘류트’(16세기 기타. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/Wg11Uu )를 연주하고, 넌 ‘케틀드럼’(큰북. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/nbjyPZ )를 치면 될 거잖니.”
사냥개가 그 말에 동의하고 함께 여행길에 올랐어요.
멀리 못가서 그들은 고양이 한 마리를 발견했다. 
고양이가 ‘오만 상을 찌푸리며’(원문→3일 연속 비 맞은 얼굴 표정을 하고서) 길가에 앉아 있는 게 아닌가! 
“아니 왜, 이발사 양반, 이렇게 얼굴이 망가진 거야?”라며 당나귀가 말했어요. 
“내 목이 달아날 지경인데 놀고 앉아 있을 시간이 어디 있다고?”라며 고양이가 대답했어요.
“내가 지금 나이를 먹고 보니 이빨들도 시원찮지, 그러니 난롯가에 앉아 얘기하는 거나 좋아하지. 생쥐를 잡는 거보다 말이야. 그랬더니 내 안주인이 나를 물에 익사시키려하지 뭐야, 그래서 가까스로 도망쳐 나온 거야. 그나저나 이제 어디로 갈지 참 고민이야. 어쩐담?”
“잘 됐네, 우리랑 브레멘으로 가자. 넌 밤무대에도 조예가 깊잖아(밤무대를 이해하잖아). 넌 충분히 ‘시’(도시 할 때의 ‘시’) 음악대원이 될 수 있어.”
고양이가 그 참 기가 막힌 생가이라 여기고서 그들과 함께 갔다. 
이렇게 도망자 세 명이 농장 주변의 뜰로 들어가니, 거기 정문 위에 수탉이 앉아 목청껏 울고 있었다. 
“네 꼬끼오 소리가 하늘을 치르고도 남겠다.”라며 당나귀가 말했어요. “도대체 뭔 일인데?”
“난 지금 맑은 날씨를 예언하고 있어. 그래야 우리 마님께서 아기 예수의 귀여운 셔츠들을 손세탁해 말릴 수가 있거든.”라며 그 수탉이 말했어요. “하지만 웬걸 일요일에 손님들이 오기로 했는데, 이 망할 여편네가 동정심도 없이 요리사보고 나를 내일 요리해 스프로 내놓으라 하질 뭐야. 아마도 오늘 저녁에 내 목이 달아날 거야. 그러니 숨이 붙어 있을 때 꼬끼오 라고 실컷 울어놓아야 여한이 없을 거 같아서.” 
“아, 그럴 바에야, 붉은 ‘볏’(수탉의 머리 위에 있는 톱니 모양의 살),”라며 당나귀가 말했어요. “차라리 우리와 함께 가는 게 어때. 우리 지금 브레멘으로 가는 길인데. 세상 어디든 죽음보단 나을 거 아냐. 게다가 넌 좋은 목소리도 가졌겠다, 우리와 함께 음악을 하면 넌 분명 두각을 나타낼 거야!”
꼬끼오가 이 계획에 동의했다. 
그리하여 네 명이서 다함께 가게 되었다. 
하지만 그들이 채 브레멘 시에 도착하지 못한 어느 날 저녁, 그들은 그날 밤을 지낼 목적으로 어떤 숲으로 들어갔다.
큰 나무 아래 당나귀와 사냥개가 자리를 잡고 누웠어요. 나뭇가지엔 고양이와 수탉이 자리를 잡고 앉았고요.
하지만 수탉은 나무 꼭대기까지 곧장 날아올라갔어요. 거기가 가장 안전한 곳 같았거든요.
눈을 붙이기 전 사방을 한 번 둘러보는데, 저 멀리에서 희미한 불빛이 반짝 하는 거예요.
그래서 수탉이 친구들에게 “멀리 앉은 곳에 집이 한 채 있어. 불빛이 보여.”라고 외쳤어요.
당나귀가 말했어요.
“그렇담, 일어나 더 걷자, 여긴 쉬기엔 나빠.”
사냥개는 그 집에 살점이 좀 붙어있는 뼈다귀 몇 개라도 남아 있을 거라 생각하고 좋아했어요!
그리하여 그들이 그 불빛이 보이는 곳까지 가보았어요.
다가감에 따라 그 불빛은 더 또렷하게 더 밝게 보였어요.
그런데 에구머니나 그건 휘황찬란하게 밝혀 놓은 강도들의 집이었어요.
가장 키가 큰 당나귀가 창문에 기대 안을 들여다봤어요.
“뭐가 보이니, 회색 말아?”라며 수탉이 말했어요. 
“뭐가 보이냐면?”라고 당나귀가 대답했어요. “먹고 마실만한 산해진미가 가득 든 식탁 하나랑, 거기 앉아 즐기고 있는 강도들이 보여.”
“그 참 우리 거였음 좋았을 것을.”라며 수탉이 말했어요.
“그러게, 그래, 아, 우리가 저 자리에 있어야 하는 건데!”라며 당나귀가 말했어요.
그런 다음 동물들은, 어떻게 하면 저 강도들을 쫓아낼 수 있을지 회의를 가졌어요.
마침내 계획 하나를 마련했죠.
당나귀가 먼저 앞발로 창턱에 기대고 섰어요. 사냥개가 그런 당나귀의 등 위로 뛰어올랐어요. 고양이가 개를 타고 기어올랐어요. 마지막으로 수탉이 날아올라 고양이의 머리 위에 앉았어요.
이것이 완성되자, 정해진 신호와 함께, 그들이 다함께 음악을 연주하기 시작했어요.
당나귀는 시끄러운 당나귀 울음소리를 내고요, 사냥개는 짖어대고요, 고양이는 야옹야옹 거리고요, 수탉은 꼬끼오 울어댔어요.
그런 다음 그들이 창문을 밀어젖히며 방 안으로 뛰어들었어요.
그 바람에 유리창이 와장창 깨졌어요!
이 끔찍한 소란에 강도들이 벌떡 일어났어요. 유령이 나타났다고 밖엔 상상이 안 된 이 상황에 강도들이 놀라 울창한 숲으로 줄행랑을 치고 말았어요.
이제 네 친구가 식탁에 모여 앉아 남겨진 음식들로 거나하게 배를 채웠어요. 앞으로 한 달 동안은 쫄쫄 굶을 사람마냥 미친 듯이 먹어댔답니다.
네 명의 ‘순회 극단원’(돌아다니며 음악 연주하는 사람)들이 식사를 마치자마자, 그들은 불을 끄고 각자의 습성에 따라 최적의 누울 장소를 찾아 다녔어요.
당나귀는 마당에 있던 약간의 밀짚들 위에 자리를 잡고 누웠고요, 사냥개는 문 뒤에, 고양이는 따뜻한 재(타고 남은 재)가 남아 있던 난로 위에 가 잡았고요, 수탉은 ‘대들보’(지붕을 떠받치기 위해, 기둥 사이에 놓음. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/NrIY2X ) 위에 자리를 차지하고 앉았어요.
모두들 고된 걷기로 지친 상태라 곧 잠이 들었답니다.
한밤중(밤 12시)이 지나 집의 불빛이 더는 새어나오지 않자 멀리를 이를 지켜보고 있던 강도들이 하나둘 조용히 모두 모였다. 
두목이 말했다.
“그렇다고 정신 줄을 놓아선 안 돼.”
그러면서 부하 한 명에게 가서 집을 조사하고 오라 지시를 내렸어요.
그 심부름꾼이 가 보니 모든 게 너무도 고요했어요. 그래서 부엌으로 가 촛불을 밝히려고 보니 불씨가 아직 살아 있는 석탄이 반짝하고 보였어요.
그런데 그건 실상 고양이의 사나운 눈이었어요.
그가 아무것도 모르고 ‘황린 성냥’(19세기 옛날 성냥개비. 가만있어도 불이 붙여져 지금은 사용안함) 하나를 그 불빛에 가져다댔어요.
하지만 고양이로선 이 우스운 상황이 이해가지 않았어요.
그래서 냉큼 그의 얼굴로 뛰어올라 막 야옹야옹 거리며 할퀴었어요.
그가 무시무시하게 놀라 뒷문으로 달아나려는데, 아뿔싸 때마침 거기 누워 있던 개가 펄떡 일어나며 그의 다리를 사정없이 물어버리는 거예요.
그가 이제 마당을 가로질러 밀짚더미 옆으로 도망치는데, 당나귀가 자신의 뒷발로 그를 사정없이 걷어차는 거예요.
이 소란에 깬 수탉 또한 기가 살아선 대들보에서, 그를 향해 큰 소리를 “꼬끼오 꼬꼬!” 라고 질러 침묵시켰어요.
죽을 뚱 살 뚱 도망친 그 강도가 두목에게 와 말했어요.
“아, 집 안에 끔찍한 마녀가 한 명 앉아 있었어요, 그녀가 저를 손바닥으로 때리고 제 얼굴을 자신의 긴 손톱들로 할퀴었어요. 문 옆엔 식칼을 든 남자가 서 있다 제 다리를 사정없이 찌르더군요. 마당엔 검은 괴물 하나가 서 있었는데, 글쎄 저를 보자마자 나무 몽둥이로 저를 찜질하지 뭐예요. 그리고 지붕 저 위쪽에 저승사자(원문→심판자)가 앉아 있다 큰소리로 말하길, ‘오늘이 네 놈 재삿날이렸다!’(원문→저 강도로 내게 데려와라!)라고 하는 바람에 전 정말이지 있는 힘껏 도망쳐나왔어요.”
그리하여 강도들은 다시는 그 집에 얼씬도 하지 않았답니다.
하지만 ‘브레멘(독일 도시이름)의 동물 음악대’들에겐 지내기에 그 집이 안성맞춤이라 떠날 마음이 전혀 없었지요.(ㅋㅋ)
저는 이 얘기를 방금 막 듣고 쓰는 거랍니다.(원문→방금 이 얘기를 해주신 분의 입은 여전히 따끈해요.)


(끝)

동화 「브레멘의 동물 음악대」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「브레멘의 동물 음악대」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter27.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



28. 노래하는 뼈



옛날에 어느 왕국에 야생 멧돼지 한 마리가 출몰해 온 논밭을 쑥대밭으로 만드는 일이 발생했어요.
가축을 죽이는 일은 다반사에, 그의 엄니에 몸이 갈기갈기 찢긴 사람의 수도 부지기수였지요.
왕이 누구든 이 말썽꾸러기로부터 나라를 구하는 자가 있음 큰 상을 내리겠노라 약속했어요.
하지만 짐승이 너무도 커고 힘이 셌기에 누구도 감히 멧돼지가 출몰하는 숲에 얼씬할 생각도 못했지요.
마침내 참지 못한 왕이 이 야생 멧돼지를 사로잡거나 죽여주는 자에겐 자신의 하나뿐인 딸아이를 아내로 주겠노라 선포하기에 이르렀어요.
마침 시골에 두 형제가 살고 있었지요. 둘은 가난한 농부의 자식들이었어요. 그래서 기꺼이 이 무모한 모험에 착수할 용의가 있었답니다. 너무 가난했으니까요.
형은 교활하고 약삭빠른 자로 자존심이 셌어요. 반면 동생은 착하고 순진한 자로 다정한 마음을 지닌 자였어요.
왕이 말했어요.
“확실히 그 짐승을 발견하기 위해 자네 둘은 서로 반대편에서 숲으로 들어가게.”
그리하여 형이 서쪽에서 동쪽으로 수색하고, 동생은 동쪽에서 서쪽으로 수색하며 들어갔어요.
동생이 조금 들어가니, 난쟁이 한 명이 툭 튀어나오더니 글쎄 그의 손에 검은 창 하나를 쥐어주며 이렇게 말하는 거예요.
“와따(=최고다) 니가 순박하게 생겨서 이걸 주는 기다. 이거만 있음 야생 멧돼지도 널 함부로 공격하진 못할 거야, 이게 너를 보호해줄 기다.”
동생은 그 난쟁이에게 “고맙습니다.”라고 말한 다음 창을 어깨에 메고 두려움없이 앞으로 나아갔어요.
오래지 않아 멧돼지가 나타나 그에게 돌진해왔어요.
하지만 동생이 창을 멧돼지 쪽으로 겨누자, 맹렬하게 돌진해오던 멧돼지가 그만 속도를 줄이지 못하고 그 창에 찔려 심장이 두 쪽이 나고 말았어요.
그런 다음 동생이 그 괴물을 등에 메고 왕이 계신 집으로 향했어요.
동생이 ‘숲의 반대쪽 편’(숲의 서쪽 끝. 동생은 동쪽에서 서쪽으로 수색해 들어갔음)으로 나 집의 출입구가 있고 그 안에 많은 사람들이 포도주를 마시고 춤을 추며 흥겨워하고 있는 거예요.
여기에 그의 형도 벌써 와 있었어요.
형은, 어쨌든 야생 멧돼지가 자길 피해 도망갈 리는 없고 그러니 차라리 술이나 진탕 먹고 용감해질 계획이었던 거죠.
하지만 자기 동생이 ‘전리품’(이득)을 가지고 울창한 숲에서 모습을 드러내는 걸 보곤, 형의 질투심 많고 그렇지 않아도 사악한 심장이 한시도 가만있지 못했어요.
형이 동생에게 소리쳤어요.
“어이 동생, 이리와, 포도주 한 잔하며 쉬엄쉬엄 몸 좀 녹이라고.”
전혀 ‘적의’(해치려는 마음)가 없던 동생은 들어와 형에게 말했어요.
“난쟁이가 창을 줬는데 그걸 가지고 멧돼지를 죽일 수 있었지 뭐야.”
형은 그렇게 밤까지 동생을 거기에 붙들어두었어요.
그런 다음 함께 떠났죠.
어둠 속에서 그들은 시내 위에 있는 다리에 도착했어요.
형은 동생보고 먼저 가게 했어요.
동생이 반쯤 건넜을 때, 형이 뒤에서 동생을 아주 세게 때렸어요. 그 바람에 동생이 쓰러져 죽고 말았어요.
형은 동생을 다리 아래로 데려가 묻었어요.
그런 다음 멧돼지를 지고 왕께 가 마치 자신이 그걸 죽인양 연기했어요.
그 결과 형은 공주와 결혼하게 되었어요.
그의 동생이 돌아오지 않는 것에 대해, 형은 이렇게 말했어요.
“멧돼지가 죽인 게 분명해요.”
그래서 모두들 그렇게 믿었지요.
하지만 하느님 앞에 숨길 건 아무 것도 없어요. 또한 사악한 자의 의도는 언젠가는 들통 나기 마련이에요.
수년이 지나, 양치는 사람 하나가 양 떼를 몰고 그 다리를 건너다 다리 아래 모래에 뭐가 드러나 있는 걸 보게 되었어요. 그건 눈처럼 새하얗고 예쁜 뼈였어요.
양치는 사람이 그걸로 입으로 부는 걸 만들 마음을 먹었어요.
그래서 다리 아래로 기어 내려가 그걸 주어든 다음 ‘뿔피리’처럼 입으로 불 수 있게 다듬었어요.
하지만 다 완성되고 그가 처음 그걸 불었을 때, 놀랍게도, 그 뼈가 스스로 이렇게 노래하기 시작하지 뭐예요.
“아, 친구여, 내 뼈를 부는 자여! 나는 물 아래에 너무 오래 묻혀 있었다네. 내 형이 나를 죽이고 멧돼지를 빼앗았지. 그리곤 공주님을 자기 아내로 취했다네.” 
“스스로 노래를 하는,”라며 양치는 사람이 말했어요. “놀라운 뿔피리잖아! 아무래도 내 주군인 왕께 가지고 가 봐야겠다.”
그가 그걸 왕께 가져가자, 그 뿔피리가 다시 아름다운 노래를 부르기 시작했어요.
하지만 왕은 그 노래가 전부 무슨 애기인지 이해했어요. 그래서 즉시 다리 아래에 있는 땅을 파헤쳐보게 지시를 내렸어요.
곧 살해된 동생의 해골(뼈만 남은 거)이 햇볕에 드러났어요.
사악한 형의 짓이 만천하에 드러나는 순간이었지요.
형은 그 짓을 부정할 수 없었어요.
사람들은 형을 포대기에 넣어 꿰맨 다음 물에 빠뜨려버렸어요.
하지만 살해당한 동생의 뼈들은 소중히 한데 모아 ‘교회 부속의 뜰’에 있는 아름다운 무덤에 묻어 ‘영면할 수 있게’(원문→휴식을 취할 수 있게) 해주었답니다.


(끝)

동화 「노래하는 뼈」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「노래하는 뼈」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter28.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



29. 악마의 황금 머리카락 세 가닥



옛날 옛적에, 예쁘장한 아들을 막 출산한 어느 가난한 여인네가 있었어요. 
그 애는 세상에 나올 때 ‘양막’(태아를 둘러싸고 있는 얇은 막)의 일부를 머리에 뒤집어쓰고서 나왔어요(당시 이것을 길조로 여겼다고 함). 게다가 그 애는 14살이 되는 해에 왕의 따님을 아내로 맞을 거란 예언도 받았답니다.
그게 정말인지, 그 후 곧 왕이 그 마을에 도착했어요. 
마을 사람 누구도 그가 왕인지 몰랐어요. 
그때 왕이 사람들에게 무슨 새로운 소식이 있느냐고 물었어요.
그래서 사람들이 대답했어요.
“아 글쎄 애가 막 태어났는데 양막을 뒤집어쓰고 나왔다지 뭐유. 이거야 말로 세상의 복이지, 암. 게다가 예언이 있기를, 그 애가 14살이 되면 공주님을 아내로 얻는 데요 글쎄.”
아 근데, 이 왕은 아주 못된 마음씨를 지닌 왕이었어요. 그래서 이 말 같지도 않은 예언 소식에 왈칵 화를 내며 그 부모의 집으로 냉큼 달려갔어요.
물론 겉으론 무척 우호적인 척 보이면서요.
왕이 말했어요.
“보아하니 가난한 분들 같은데, 내게 당신 아이를 맡기시오, 내 잘 돌봐주리다.”
처음엔 부모님도 거절했지만 이 이방인이 황금 뭉치를 내밀며 거듭 제안하니 생각이 바꿨어요.
그들이 생각했어요.
‘그래 복덩이(복덩어리)니까 모든 게 잘 풀릴 거야.’
그들이 마침내 동의하며 왕에게 아가를 건넸어요.
왕이 그 아가를 상자에 담아 깊은 강이 나올 때까지 말을 타고 달렸어요.
그런 다음 그 상자를 냅다 던지며 생각했어요.
“이제야 저런 되먹지도 않은 놈을 내 딸에게서 떨쳐냈군.”
하지만 그 상자는 가라앉질 않았어요.
보트처럼 둥둥 떴어요. 그리고 상자 안으로 물 한 방울 들어오지 않았어요.
그리하여 그 상자는 물방앗간이 있는 왕의 주요 도시까지 3킬로미터나 더 떠내려가 그곳 물방아용 둑에서 멈추었어요.
때마침 물방앗간 소년이 운이 좋게도 거기 서 있다 왠 상자가 떠밀려 내려오는 걸 목격하곤 갈고리로 그걸 끄집어냈어요.
굉장한 횡재라 생각하고서 보물이 들어있지 않나 보려고요.
하지만 소년이 상자를 열어보니 웬 예쁘장한 남자아기가 들어있지 뭐예요. 갓 태어난 팔팔한 아가였어요.
소년이 물방앗간 주인 부부에게 그 애를 데려갔어요.
아이가 없던 부부가 무척 반기며 말했어요.
“하느님이 주신 보물일 거예요.”
부부가 그 애를 정성껏 돌봤어요. 그래서 아가는 무척이나 선량하게 자라났답니다. 
(14년이 지난 후 어느 날)
그러다 우연히 모진 비바람이 몰아치는 날, 그 왕이 물방앗간으로 들어왔어요.
왕은 물방앗간 식구들에게 “키 큰 저 젊은이가 자네들의 아들인가?”라고 물었어요.
“아닙니다요,”라며 그들이 대답했어요. “주워온 아이인걸요. 14년 전에 상자에 담겨 물방아용 둑에까지 떠밀려 왔습죠. 그리고 일하는 소년이 저 애를 물 밖으로 건져냈지요.” 
그러자 왕은, 자신이 강에다 내다버렸던 그때 그 복덩이가 다름 아닌 바로 그란 것을 알아차렸어요.
그래서 왕이 말했어요.
“착한 백성들아, 내가 저 젊은이 편에 왕비에게 보낼 편지를 한 통 보내도 되겠느냐? 수고비로 저 애에게 금화 두 닢을 준다면?”
“분부대로 하겠습니다요,”라며 그들이 대답했어요.
그들은 소년에게 채비(준비)를 하라 말했어요.
그런 다음 왕이 왕비 앞으로 편지 한 통을 썼어요. 
거기엔 이렇게 적혀 있었지요.
“이 편지를 든 소년이 도착하는 대로 즉각 죽여 묻으시오. 모든 일이 내가 도착하기 전에 마무리 되어야하오.”
소년이 그 편지를 들고서 출발했어요.
그러다 그만 길도 잃고 저녁이 되어 울창한 숲에 들어가게 되었어요.
소년이 보니 저 멀리서 작은 불빛 하나가 보였어요.
거리로 가 보니 오두막이 한 채 나왔어요.
그가 안으로 들어가니, 노파 한 명만이 불가 옆에 조용히 앉아 있었어요.
소년을 보자 그녀가 깜짝 놀라했어요.
그녀가 말했어요.
“여기가 어디라고 온 게냐, 어딜 가려고?”
“물방앗간에서 왔어요.”라며 그가 대답했어요. “왕비님께 가던 길이었어요. 편지를 전달해드리기로 했거든요. 그러다 숲에서 길을 잃는 바람에 아무래도 여기서 하룻밤만 묵어야 할 거 같아요.”
“이런 불쌍한 애가 있나.”라며 그 여인이 말했어요. “넌 지금 도둑들의 소굴에 들어온 게다, 그들이 오면 널 죽일 게다.”
“오라면 오라고 하세요.”라며 소년이 말했어요. “무섭지 않으니까요. 게다가 지쳐서 더는 못 걷겠어요.”
그러면서 소년은 긴 의자 위에 몸을 쭉 뻗고 누워 자 버리는 거예요.
뒤이어 도둑들이 도착했다가 웬 낮선 소년이 거기 누워 있는 걸 보곤 화를 내며 뭔 일이냐고 물었어요.
“아,”라며 노파가 말했어요. “아무것도 모르는 애야, 숲에서 길을 잃었데, 불쌍하잖니 재워 주게나. 왕비에게 편지 한 통만 전달해주면 된다는데.”
그래서 도둑들이 그 편지를 열어서 읽어보니, 거기엔 소년이 도착하자마자 죽이라는 내용이 적혀 있지 뭐예요.
그 바람에 몰인정한 도둑들마저 동정심이 생겼어요. 
그래서 두목이 그 편지를 갈갈이 찢어버리고 새로 하나 썼어요.
즉 이 소년이 도착하는 대로 공주와 꼭 결혼시키라는 내용이었지요.
그런 다음 그들은 소년이 긴 의자 위에서 다음날 아침까지 푹 자게 놓아두었어요.
다음날 소년이 깨자 그들이 그에게 그 편지를 주며 길을 알려주었어요.
그리하여 그 편지를 받아 읽어본 왕비는 정말로 거기 적힌 대로 훌륭한 결혼식을 준비하게 시키고 공주님을 복덩이와 결혼시켰답니다.
공주는 그 청년이 꽃미남에다 싹싹해 그와 같이 사는 게 기쁘고 만족스러웠어요.
일정 시간이 지난 후, 왕이 자기 궁전으로 돌아와 보니 예전 그 예언이 정말 이루어져 있는 게 아니겠어요. 복덩이가 자기(왕) 딸과 결혼하는 거 말이에요.
“아니 이게 대체 어찌 된 일이오?”라며 왕이 말했어요. “왜 내가 편지에서 이른 대로 하지 않은 것이오.”
그래서 왕비가 그에게, 직접 쓴 것을 보시라며 그 편지를 건네주었어요.
왕이 보니 분명 다른 편지와 뒤바뀐 게 분명했어요.
“이게 도대체 어찌된 거냐, 널 신뢰해 맡긴 편지를 왜 다른 것과 바꾸었느냐?”라고 그 청년에게 물었지요.
“저는 모르옵니다.”라며 그가 대답했어요. “아마 제가 숲에서 잔 그날 밤에 바뀐 듯합니다.” 
왕이 울화통을 터뜨리며 말했어요.
“너가 이대로는 살 수 없다. 적어도 내 딸과 결혼한 자는 그 누구라도 내게 지옥에 사는 악마의 머리에 나는 황금 머리카락 세 가닥을 가지다 주어야 한다. 내가 원하는 게 그거니 자기고 오거라, 그럼 내 딸과 계속 살게 해주마.”
이게 무슨 말이냐 하면 왕이 심사가 뒤틀려 그를 영원히 제거할 계획이란 거죠.
하지만 우리의 복덩이는 대답했어요.
“제가 그 황금 머리카락들을 가져다 드리겠습니다, 저는 악마 따윈 두렵지 않거든요.”
그 후 즉시 그가 그들과 작별인사를 하고서 여행길에 올랐어요. 
길을 따라 가다보니 큰 도시가 하나 나왔어요.
거기 성문의 경비병이 그에게 물었어요.
“무슨 일(직업)을 하요, 무얼 알고 있소?”
“저는 모든 걸 알고 있습니다.”라며 복덩이가 대답했어요. 
“그렇담 우리를 좀 도와주시오,”라며 그 경비병이 말했어요. “예전엔 ‘포도주’가 콸콸 잘도 넘쳐흐르던 우리 시장의 분수가 왜 말라서 더는 한 방울의 ‘물’도 내뿜지 않는 건지 알려줄 수 있으시오?”
“그거라면 제가 되돌아올 때까지 기다리심,”라며 그가 대답했어요. “알려드리겠습니다.”
그런 다음 그가 더 걸어가니 이번엔 또 다른 도시 하나가 나왔어요.
거기 성문에도 역시 수위가 서 있다 질문을 던졌어요.
“무슨 일(직업)을 하요, 무얼 알고 있소?”
“저는 모든 걸 알고 있습니다.”라며 복덩이가 대답했어요. 
“그렇담 우리를 좀 도와주시오,”라며 그 수위가 말했어요. “예전엔 황금 사과들이 잘도 나던 우리 도시의 나무 한 그루가 이제 더는 잎도 피지 않으니 이게 대체 무슨 일이오?”
“그거라면 제가 되돌아올 때까지 기다리심,”라며 그가 대답했어요. “알려드리겠습니다.”
그런 다음 그는 계속 걸어 아주 넓은 강에 다다랐어요. 그가 건너야만 하는 강이었지요.
그 강의 ‘나룻배 사공’이 그에게 물었어요.
“무슨 일(직업)을 하요, 무얼 알고 있소?”
“저는 모든 걸 알고 있습니다.”라며 복덩이가 대답했어요. 
“그렇담 나 좀 도와주시오,”라며 그 경비병이 말했어요. “내가 도대체 왜 이렇게 강을 건너고 다시 돼 건너며 지긋지긋하게 노를 저어야하는 거요, 이 일에서 벗어날 방법은 없겠소?”
“그거라면 제가 되돌아올 때까지 기다려주심,”라며 그가 대답했어요. “알려드리겠습니다.”
강을 건너자 지옥의 입구가 보였어요.
그 안은 시꺼멓고 불에 ‘그슬려’(=타) 있었어요.
마침 악마는 집에 없고 그의 할머니가 커다란 안락의자에 앉아 계셨어요.
“뭐니?”라며 그녀가 그에게 말했어요. 
하지만 그녀에게 적의는 보이지 않았어요.
“저는 악마의 황금 머리카락 세 가닥을 가지러 왔어요.”라며 그가 대답했지요. “그렇지 않음 제 아내와 계속 살 수가 없거든요.”
“그 참 말하기 뭐하다만,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “악마가 집에 와 너를 발견하면, 널 죽일 텐데, 그런데 어째 네게 동정심이 이는 구나, 가만 보자 내가 너를 도울 방법이 있는지 한 번 보자구나.”
그녀는 그를 개미로 변하게 하고서 말했어요.
“내 드레스의 주름들 속으로 기어오르거라, 거기면 네가 안전할 게다.”
“넵~,”라며 그가 대답했어요. “여기도 그럭저럭 괜찮아요. 그런데 알고 싶은 게 세 가지가 있는데요. 왜 한때는 포도주가 콸콸 잘도 넘쳐흐르던 분수가 말라버려 더는 물 한 방울도 내뿜지 않는지요, 그리고 예전엔 황금 사과들이 잘도 나던 나무에서 이젠 잎사귀 하나 나지 않는지요, 그리고 나룻배 사공은 왜 저렇게 죽을 때까지 강을 건넜다 다시 돼 건넜다 해야 하는지요 그가 자기 일에서 해방될 방법은 없는지요?”
“어려운 질문들이구나,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “내가 황금 머리카락 세 가닥을 차례대로 뽑을 때마다 악마가 하는 얘기들을 침착하게 잘 들어보거라.”
밤이 되자, 악마가 집에 돌아왔어요.
악마는 들어서자마자 집안 공기가 순수하지 않다는 것을 대번에 눈치챘어요.
“뭐야 이거 인간 냄새잖아.”라며 그가 말했어요. “여기에 뭔가 있어.” 
그런 다음 그는 구석구석 캐고 살피며 다녔지만 개미 새끼 한 마리도 찾지 못했어요.
그의 할머니가 그를 꾸짖었어요.
“또 어진거니,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “청소한지 언제 됐다고 또 어지니. 인간 냄새가 나는 건 네 코 속에 인간의 살점이 붙어 있기 때문이야. 자 앉아서 저녁이나 들거라.”
그는 먹고 마신 다음 피곤해져 머리를 할머니의 무릎에 베고 누웠어요.
머지않아 그는 코를 골며 숨을 거칠게 내쉬면서 꿀잠에 들었어요.
그때 노파가 황금 머리카락 한 가닥을 집더니 확 뽑아 자기 옆에 내려놓았어요.
“아아!”라며 악마가 소리쳤어요. “지금 뭐하시는 거예요?”
“네 머리카락을 쥔 걸 보니,”라며 할머니가 대답했어요. “막 나쁜 꿈을 꿨나 보다.”
“무슨 꿈인데요?”라며 악마가 말했어요.
“한때는 콸콸 흐르다 말라버려 물 한 방울 나오지 않는, 시장판의 분수대 꿈을 꾸었지 뭐니, 그 이유가 뭘까?”
“그거야, 뭐! 사람들이 알 턱이 없죠.”라며 악마가 대답했어요. “그 우물에 있는 돌 아래에 두꺼비 한 마리가 앉아 있는데, 그걸 죽이면, 포도주가 다시 콸콸 흘러나올 텐데 말이죠.”
그가 다시 잠이 들어 창문이 다 흔들릴 정도로 코를 골기 시작했어요.
그때 그녀가 두 번째 머리카락을 확 뽑았어요.
“허어! 또 뭐예요?”라며 악마가 화가 나 소리쳤어요. 
“내가 꿈결에 그만,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “그걸 집었다보다.”
“이번엔 또 무슨 꿈을 꾸신 건데요?”라며 그가 물었어요.
“아 글쎄 어느 왕국에 사과나무 한 그루가 서 있는 꿈인데, 한땐 그렇게도 많은 황금 사과들이 나던 나무가 이젠 잎사귀 하나 나지 않느니 이게 무슨 이유일까?”
“오오! 그걸 사람들이 알 턱이 없지.”라며 그 악마가 대답했어요. “생쥐 한 마리가 그 나무의 뿌리를 갉아먹고 있기 때문이에요. 그 놈과 죽이면 다시 황금 사과들이 열릴 거예요. 하지만 그 생쥐가 계속 갉아먹게 둔다면 나무 전체가 시들고 말겠죠. 이제 됐죠, 저 좀 자게 내버려 둬요, 꿈을 꾸시든 말든. 한 번만 더 제 잠을 방해하시면 그땐 정말 귀사대기를 한 방 날려드릴 테니까요.”
할머니는 그가 잠들어 코를 골 때까지 좋게 좋게 말로 타일러 기분을 누그러뜨렸어요.
그땐 그녀가 세 번째 황금 머리카락을 집어 확 뽑고 말았어요.
악마가 벌떡 일어나더니 길길이 화를 냈어요. 정말 그녀가 “내 꿈 좀 봐줄래, 꿈이 하도 뒤숭숭해서 말이다?”라며 다시 한 번 좋은 말로 그를 타이르지 않았다면 그가 할머니께 뭔 짓을 했을지 몰라요. 
“이번엔 또 무슨 꿈인데요?”라며 호기심이 땡긴 그가 물었어요.
“항상 강의 한쪽과 반대쪽을 오고가며 배를 저어야하며 절대 자유로울 수 없다며 불평하는 나룻배 사공의 꿈을 꾸었지 뭐니. 이게 대체 무슨 변고(이유)냐?”
“아아! 등신(바보 나룻배 사공),”라며 악마가 대답했어요. “누가 와서 강을 건너 달라 말하며 상대방의 손에 노를 쥐어주면 될 것을, 그럼 그 노를 받은 놈이 나룻배로 건널 거고, 그럼 자긴(나룻배 사공) 해방되는 것을.”
그리하여 할머니는 황금 머리카락 세 가닥을 모두 뽑았고, 세 개의 질문에 대한 대답도 모두 듣게 되었지요.
할머니는 이 능구렁이(악마)를 혼자 있게 해주었어요. 그래서 그는 새벽녘까지 푹 잤답니다.
그런 다음 악마가 외출하고 나서, 노파는 자신의 드레스 주름에서 개미를 끄집어내, 다시 예전 사람의 모습을 한 복덩이로 도로 돌려놓아주었어요.
“자 여기 이건 네게 줄 황금 머리카락 세 가닥이다.”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “세 가지 질문들에 대해선 악마가 어제 말하는 것을 잘 들었겠지?”
“네에~,”라며 그가 대답했어요. “잘 들었어요, 꼭꼭 기억해둘게요.”
“이제 네가 바란 바를 다 얻었으니,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “이제 그만 가 보거라.”
그는 노파에게 “도와줘서 정말 감사합니다.”라며 인사를 드린 다음, 다행히도 수수께끼가 다 풀린 것에 크게 기뻐하며 지옥을 나왔어요.
그가 나룻배 사공에게 가니 사공이 은근 약속했던 대답을 듣기 바라는 눈치였어요.
“저를 일단 건너편으로 날라주시면요,”라며 복덩이가 말했어요. “그럼 어떻게 하면 당신이 해방될 수 있을지를 알려드리도록 할 게요.”
그래서 배가 반대쪽 강기슭에 도착한 다음, 그는 사공에게 악마의 조언을 들려주었어요.
“누가 다음에 오던, 강을 건너고 싶다는 자가 있음, 그 자의 손에 노를 쥐어주시기만 하면 되요.”
그는 계속 걸어가 그 도시에 도착했어요.
거기엔 열매를 맺지 않는 나무가 서 있는 곳이었지요.
이번에도 경비원이 그 대답을 듣길 은근 바라는 눈치였어요.
그래서 그가 악마에게 들은 것을 그 경비원에게 알려주었어요.
“나무의 뿌리를 갉아먹고 있는 생쥐를 죽이세요, 그럼 황금 사과들이 다시 열릴 거예요.”
경비원은 그에게 고맙다고 말한 다음 황금을 수북이 실은 당나귀 두 마리를 그에게 딸려 보냈어요(주었어요).  
그는 결국 우물이 말라버린 도시에도 도착을 했어요.
그가 경비원에게 악마가 말한 것을 들려주었어요.
“우물의 돌 아래에 두꺼비 한 마리가 자리 잡고 있을 것이니, 그 놈을 찾아내 죽이세요. 그럼 우물이 다시 포도주를 풍족하게 내뿜을 거예요.”
그 경비원이 그에게 고맙다며 인사를 하더니 황금을 가든 실은 당나귀 두 마리를 주었어요.
마침내 우리의 복덩이는 아내가 있는 집에 도착했어요.
그녀는 그를 다시 보자 진심 기뻤어요. 게다가 모든 게 잘 풀렸다는 그의 말에 그녀는 더 기뻤답니다.
왕 앞에 나아간 그가 왕이 바라던 것을 바쳤어요.
악마의 황금 머리카락 세 가닥 말이에요.
왕은 그와 함께 도착한, 황금을 실은 네 마리의 당나귀를 보고 아주 기뻐서 말했어요.
“이제 모든 조건들이 다 충족되었다, 너는 계속 내 딸과 살 수 있다. 그런데 말이야, 내게 들려주지 않겠나, 사랑하는 사위 군, 도대체 이 많은 황금들은 다 어디서 난 겐가? 이거 정말 엄청난 양이 아닌가!”  
“노를 저어 강을 건너,”라며 그가 대답했어요. “거기서 얻었습니다. 거기엔 온 강기슭이 모래 대신 황금이 있었습니다.”
“그렇담 내가 가도 가져올 수 있는가?”라며 왕이 말했어요.
왕은 그 일에 아주 열성적이었어요.
“원하시는 양만 큼이요.”라며 그가 대답했어요. “강에 나룻배 사공이 한 명 있는데, 그가 건너다 줄 겁니다. 그럼 강기슭에서 자루들에다가 원껏 담으시면 됩니다.”
탐욕스런 왕은 서둘러 출발했어요.
강에 도착한 왕은 나룻배 사공을 손시늉으로 불러 자신을 건너게 해 달라 말했어요.
그 나룻배 사공이 오더니 왕을 배에 태우곤, 그들이 반대쪽 강기슭에 도착하자마자 노를 왕의 손에 쥐어주더니 손살 같이 도망가 버렸어요.  
하지만 이때부터 왕은 자기 죄 값에 대한 벌로써 나룻배를 저어야했어요. 
그럼 아직도 그가 노를 젓고 있냐고요?
그럼요, 노를 쥐어줄 사람이 아무도 없었거든요. 


(동화 끝)

동화 「악마의 황금 머리카락 세 가닥」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「악마의 황금 머리카락 세 가닥」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter29.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



30. 이와 벼룩



이와 벼룩이 함께 집안일을 하다, 달걀 껍데기 안에 맥주를 완성시키고(양조하고) 있었어요.
그러다 그만 귀여운 이가 그 안에 떨어져 몸이 불 타 없어지고 말았어요.
그런 이유로 귀여운 벼룩이 큰 소리로 앙앙 울기 시작했어요.
그러자 귀여운 방문이 말했어요.
“착한 벼룩아, 왜 앙앙 울고 있니?”
“이가 타 죽었기 때문이에요.”
그러자 귀여운 방문이 삐걱삐걱 소리를 내며 웃기 시작했어요.
이것을 본 귀여운 빗자루가 구석에서 말했어요.
“왜 삐걱삐걱 거리니, 귀여운 문아? 나로선 도통 이해할 수 없는 걸?”
“귀여운 이가 불 타 버려서, 귀여운 벼룩이 울고 있데.”
그러자 귀여운 빗자루가 미친 듯이 바닥을 쓸기 시작했어요.
때마침 지나가던 귀여운 2륜(바퀴 2개) 짐마차가 말했어요.
“귀여운 빗자루야, 너 왜 바닥을 쓸고 있니? 나로선 도통 이해할 수 없는 걸?”
“귀여운 이가 불 타 버려서, 귀여운 벼룩이 울고 있데,
그게 귀여운 방문이 삐걱거리는 이유래.”
그래서 귀여운 마차가 말했어요.
“그럼 나도 달려야지.”
그러면서 마차가 맹렬히 달리기 시작했어요.
그러자 마차가 맹렬히 지나가는 것을 본 잿더미가 말했어요.
“너 왜 이렇게 미친 듯 달리는 거니, 귀여운 마차야? 나로선 도통 이해할 수 없는 걸?”
“귀여운 이가 불 타 버려서, 귀여운 벼룩이 울고 있고,
귀여운 방문이 삐걱거리고 있어. 그게 귀여운 빗자루가 바닥을 쓰는 이유래.”
잿더미가 말했어요.
“그렇담 나도 활활 불타야겠다.”
그러더니 정말 활활 불이 붙어 타기 시작했어요.
잿더미 가까이에 서 있던 귀여운 나무가 말했어요.
“잿더미야, 너 왜 타니? 나로선 도통 이해할 수 없는 걸?”
“귀여운 이가 불 타 버려서, 귀여운 벼룩이 울고 있고,
귀여운 방문이 삐걱거리고 있고, 귀여운 빗자루가 쓸고 있어,
그게 귀여운 마차가 달리고 있는 이유래.”
귀여운 나무가 말했어요.
“그렇담 나도 흔들어야지.”
그러면서 막 자기 몸을 흔들기 시작했어요. 그 바람에 나무에 붙어 있던 잎사귀들이 죄다 떨어지고 말았답니다.
물을 뜨러 나왔던 소녀가 이것을 보고 말했어요.
“귀여운 나무야, 넌 왜 몸을 흔들고 있니? 나로선 네가 흔드는 이유를 도통 이해할 수 없는 걸?”
“귀여운 이가 불 타 버려서, 귀여운 벼룩이 울고 있고,
귀여운 방문이 삐걱거리고 있고, 귀여운 빗자루는 쓸고 있고,
귀여운 마차는 달리고 있는데, 그게 귀여운 잿더미가 타는 이유라네.”
이 얘기를 들은 그 소녀가 말했어요.
“그렇담 난 이 귀여운 물동이를 깰 테야.”
그래서 그녀가 자신의 귀여운 물동이를 와장창 깨고 말았어요.
그 바람에 물이 튄 귀여운 샘물이 말했어요.
“얘, 너는 왜 멀쩡한 물동이를 깨고 있는 거니? 나로선 네가 물동이를 깨는 이유를 도통 이해할 수 없는 걸?”
“귀여운 이가 불 타 버려서, 귀여운 벼룩이 울고 있고,
귀여운 방문이 삐걱거리고 있고, 귀여운 빗자루는 쓸고 있고,
귀여운 마차는 달리고 있고, 귀여운 잿더미는 타고 있는데,
그게 귀여운 나무가 몸을 흔들고 있는 이유래.”
“오, 호!”라며 샘물이 말했어요. “그렇담 나는 흘러넘쳐야지.”
그래서 샘물이 맹렬한 기세로 흘러넘치기 시작했어요.
이 물난리에 모두가 물에 빠져 죽고 말았답니다.
소녀도, 귀여운 나무도, 귀여운 잿더미도, 귀여운 마차도, 빗자루도, 귀여운 문도, 귀여운 벼룩도, 작은 이도 모두 다 말이지요. 


(동화 끝)

동화 「이와 벼룩」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「이와 벼룩」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter30.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



31. 손 없는 소녀



옛날 어느 방앗간 주인이 서서히 가난에 빠져들었어요.
그러다 결국 자신의 방앗간과 그 뒤에 있는 큰 사과나무 한 그루 빼곤 아무것도 안 남게 되었어요.
한번은 그가 땔감을 줍기 위해 숲에 들어갔더니, 어느 노인네 한 명이 그에게로 걸어왔어요. 한 번도 본 적이 없는 노인네였어요.
노인이 말했어요.
“도끼질도 지겹지 않나. 자네 방앗간 뒤에 서 있는 것을 내게 준다 약속만 하면 내가 자넬 부자로 만들어주지, 어떤가?”
‘사과나무를 말하는 건가?’라고 방앗간 주인이 생각하고선 말했어요. “좋습니다.”
그래서 그는 그 낮선 이방인에게 각서를 써주었어요.
하지만 그 노인네는 조롱하는 듯 비웃더니 말했어요.
“3년 후 내가 다시 와 자네가 가진 걸 가져가겠네.”
그러더니 노인은 가 버렸어요.
방앗간 주인이 집으로 돌아온 것을 본 아내가 나와 말했어요.
“아니 이게 어찌된 일이지, 여보, 글쎄 갑자기 우리 집이 부자가 됐어. 집에 있는 모든 상자와 궤짝이란 궤짝이 금화로 꽉꽉 찼지 뭐야. 가지고 온 사람도 없는데, 이게 다 무슨 일이지.”
그가 대답했어요.
“오늘 숲에 갔더니 낮선 사람을 만났지 뭐야, 글쎄 내게 큰 부를 주겠데. 그 대가로 우리 집 방앗간 뒤에 서 있는 걸 자기에게 달라대. 그거라면 사과나무 한 그루 밖에 더 있어.”
“아, 여보.”라며 아내가 경악을 하며 말했어요. “그는 마왕(악마)임이 틀림없어! 그가 말한 건 사과나무가 아냐, 우리 딸이라고, 그 애가 지금 방앗간 뒤 마당을 쓸고 있단 말이야.” 
방앗간 주인의 딸은 아름답고 신앙심 깊은 소녀였어요.
(3년 후)
그녀는 이 3년을 하느님을 두려워하고 죄 없이 보냈어요.
시간이 지나, 마왕이 그녀를 데려가기로 한 날이 되자, 그녀는 몸을 깨끗이 씻고 분필로 자기 주변에 동그랗게 원을 하나 그었어요.
그 바람에 아주 일찍 나타난 마왕이 그녀 가까이 다가가질 못했어요.
마왕이 화를 내며 방앗간 주인에게 말했어요.
“그녀에게서 모든 물을 뺐어, 그래야 더는 몸을 못 씻지, 그러지 않음 나도 그녀를 어떻게 할 수 없단 말이야.”
방앗간 주인은 두려워 그 말대로 했어요.
다음날 아침 마왕이 다시 왔어요.
하지만 그녀가 두 손을 얼굴에 대고 펑펑 운 나머지 두 손이 아주 깨끗해져 있었어요.
또다시 마왕은 그녀에게 접근할 수가 없었어요.
그래서 길길이 화를 내며 방앗간 주인에게 말했어요.
“저 애 손을 둘 다 잘라버려, 그러지 않음 내가 그녀를 이길 수 없단 말이야.”
방앗간 주인이 벌벌 떨며 대답했어요.
“아니 어떻게 자기 자식의 손을 자릅니까요?”
그러자 마왕이 그를 위협하며 말했어요.
“안 그랬다간 네 놈 모가지를 가져갈 것이다.”
아빠는 너무 무서워 마왕의 말에 복종하겠노라 약속하고 말았어요.
그래서 아빠는 딸에게 가 말했어요.
“얘야, 내가 네 두 손을 자르지 않음 악마가 나를 대신 데려가겠다는 구나, 그걸 난 또 무서워 약속하고 말았다. 나 좀 살려주거라, 그리고 내가 한 짓을 용서해다오.”
그녀가 대답했어요.
“사랑하는 아빠, 아빠 뜻대로 하세요, 전 당신의 자녀잖아요.”
그 후 즉시 그녀가 두 손을 내려놓으며 자르도록 했어요.
세 번째 날이 되어 마왕이 왔어요.
하지만 그녀가 잘린 손목 위로 너무도 오랫동안 울었기 때문에 온 몸이 순결했어요.
그러자 마왕도 포기하고 말았어요. 그녀에 대한 권리도 모두 잃고 말았지요.
방앗간 주인이 딸에게 말했어요.
“너의 도움으로 내가 이토록 많은 부를 거머쥐게 되었으니 내 앞으로 너를 극진하게 돌보마.”
하지만 그녀는 대답했어요.
“저는 여기 더 머물 수 없어요. 여행을 떠나볼 거예요. 동정심 있는 사람들이 제가 필요한 것들을 내줄 거예요.”
그런 까닭에 그녀는 불구가 된 자기 두 팔을 등에 묶어 달라 말했어요.
해가 뜰 무렵 그녀는 여행길에 올랐어요. 밤이 깔릴 때까지 하루 온 종일을 걸었답니다.
그런 다음 그녀는 궁전의 정원에 들어가게 되었어요. 어렴풋한 달빛에 의지해서 보니 저 앞 나무들에 아름다운 과일열매들이 가득 달린 게 보였어요. 하지만 거기로 다가갈 수가 없었어요. 그 주변으로 둥글게 많은 물이 있었거든요.
온종일 걷느라 무엇 하나 먹지도 마시지도 못한 상태였어요.
배고프고 고통스럽던 그녀가 생각했어요.
‘아, 저 안에만 들어갈 수 있음 과일을 먹을 수 있을 텐데, 그러지 않음 굶어죽을 거 같아!’
그런 다음 그녀는 무릎을 꿇고 앉아 하느님을 생각하며 기도드렸어요.
그 순간 천사 하나가 그녀에게로 내려와 물에 둑을 만들어주셨어요. 
그래서 해자(=물)가 말라 그녀가 지나갈 수 있었어요.
그녀가 정원에 들어갈 때 그 천사도 같이 따라 들어갔어요.
때깔 좋은 배들이 가득 있는 나무 한 그루가 보였어요. 하지만 그 배들은 모두 수를 세린 것들이었어요.
그래도 너무 배가 고팠던 그녀가 나무에서 배 하나만 입으로 따서 맛있게 먹었어요. 그 외에는 건들지 않았어요.
정원사가 지켜보고 있었어요.
하지만 천사가 그녀 옆에 있는 것을 본 그는 두려워 그 처녀가 유령일 거라 생각하고 그 유령에게 감히 소리를 지르거나 말을 걸지도 못하고 잠자코 있었어요. 
그녀는 배를 다 먹자 만족했어요. 그래서 관목 사이로 몸을 숨겼어요.
그 정원을 소유하고 있는 왕이 다음날 아침 내려와 숫자를 세려보더니, 배가 하나 없어진 것을 보곤, 정원사에게 이게 어찌된 일인지 물었어요. 떨어진 거라면 나무 아래에 배가 놓여 있어야 하는데 온데간데없이 사라졌거든요.
그러자 정원사가 대답했어요.
“어젯밤 두 손이 없는 유령이 한 명 오더니 배 하나를 한 입 가득 먹어치웠습니다요.”
왕이 말했어요.
“아니 그 유령은 어떻게 물을 건넜단 말이냐, 그리고 배를 먹은 유령은 그럼 어디로 갔더란 말이냐?”
정원사가 대답했어요.
“눈처럼 새하얀 의상을 입은 누군가가 하늘에서 내려와 둑을 만들고 물을 가두자, 그 유령이 해자(=물)를 건널 수 있었습니다요. 아무래도 그게 천사 분인 거 같아 저는 두려워 감히 묻지 못했거나와 입도 벙끗할 수 없었나이다. 그래도 유령이 배를 다 먹자 물러갔나이다.”
왕이 말했어요.
“그게 참말인지, 오늘 밤 너와 함께 지켜보겠다.”
어둠이 깔리자 왕이 정원으로 내려왔어요.
왕은 혹시 몰라 목사님도 한 분 같이 데리고 왔어요.
그 목사님은 영혼과도 대화를 나눌 수 있는 분이셨거든요.
세 사람이 모두 나무 아래에 몸을 숨기고 망을 보았어요.
한밤중(밤 12시)이 되자 그 처녀가 수풀에서 기어 나와 나무쪽으로 가더니 입을 이용해 배 하나를 따 다시 먹었어요. 물론 그녀의 옆에는 새하얀 옷을 입은 천사 한 분이 서 계셨고요.
그때 목사님이 그들 앞으로 나아가며 말했어요.
“너는 하늘에서 왔느냐 지옥에서 왔느냐? 너는 유령이냐 사람이냐?”
그녀가 대답했어요.
“저는 유령이 아니옵니다. 그저 필멸(반드시 죽기 마련인)의 인간이옵니다. 하느님을 제외한 모든 분들께 버림 받은 처량한 여인입니다.” 
왕이 말했어요. 
“원 세상에, 당신이 세상 온 사람들로부터 버림을 받았을지 몰라도, 나만은 그대를 내버리지 않겠소.”
그는 그녀를 데리고 궁전으로 들어갔어요.
그녀는 정말이지 아름답고 착했어요.
그는 진심을 다해 그녀를 사랑해주었어요.
그녀를 위해 은으로 만든 손도 만들어 주었어요.
그는 그녀를 아내로 맞아들였답니다.
1년 후 왕은 출정(전쟁터에 나감)을 하게 되었어요.
그래서 그는 어린 왕비를 잘 돌봐달라며 자신의 엄마에게 말했어요.
“아내가 출산하면 잘 돌봐주세요, 편지로도 즉시 알려주시고요.”
그런 다음 왕비는 멋진 아들을 낳았어요.
그래서 늙은 엄마는 이 기쁜 소식을 제일 먼저 편지로 아들에게 알렸어요.
그런데 심부름꾼이 먼 길을 가다 지쳐 도중에 시냇가에서 휴식을 취하다 그만 잠에 곯아떨어지고 말았어요.
그때 착한 왕비를 해할 기회를 엿보고 있던 마왕이 편지를 다른 내용으로 바꿔버렸어요.
왕비가 괴물을 출산했다는 내용으로 말이죠. 
왕은 그 편지를 읽고 충격을 받은 나머지 근심이 이만저만이 아니었어요. 그래도 자신이 되돌아갈 때까지 왕비를 잘 돌봐주고 간호해달라는 답장을 적어 보냈어요.
심부름꾼이 편지를 가지고 되돌아오다 그만 같은 장소에서 휴식을 취하다 또 잠에 곯아떨어지고 말았어요.
그러자 마왕이 한 번 더 나타나 심부름꾼의 호주머니에 다른 편지를 집어넣었어요.
그 편지엔, 이 편지가 도착하는 대로 즉각 왕비와 아이를 죽이라는 내용이었어요.
편지를 받아본 늙은 엄마(대비)는 소스라치게 놀란 나머지 도무지 믿기지가 않았어요.
그녀는 왕에게 다시 편지를 썼어요. 하지만 대답은 한결같았어요. 왜냐면 마왕이 매번 거짓 편지로 바꿔치기를 했기 때문이에요.
왕에게서 온 마지막 편지엔, 자기 말대로 실행했는지 증표로 왕비의 혀와 두 눈을 보관하고 있으라는 것까지 적혀 있었어요.
하지만 늙은 엄마는 아무 죄 없는 영혼들을 죽일 수가 없어 울고 또 울었답니다.
그래서 밤에 암사슴을 데려오게 해 혀와 두 눈을 빼내 보관했어요.
그런 다음 그녀는 왕비에게 말했어요.
“왕의 지시가 있었다. 하지만 난 너를 도저히 죽이지 못하겠다. 그러니 너는 더 이상 여기 머물 수 없다. 네 아기를 데리고서 넓은 세상으로 여행을 떠나거라. 다신 여기로 돌아오지 말고.”
불쌍한 여인이 자기 등에 아가야를 묶은 다음 눈물범벅이 되어 떠났어요.
그녀가 울창한 야생 숲속에 들어섰을 때, 그녀는 두 무릎을 꿇고 하느님께 기도했어요.
그러자 주님의 천사가 그녀에게 나타나 그녀를 귀여운 집으로 이끌었어요.
그 집 간판엔 이런 문구가 적혀 있었어요.
“누구든 자유로이 여기 머물 수 있노라.”
피부가 눈처럼 하얀 처녀 한 명이 그 귀여운 집에서 나오더니 말했어요.
“어서 오세요, 왕비 마마.”
그러면서 그녀를 안으로 안내했어요.
그런 다음 그들은 그녀의 등에서 귀여운 아가를 풀고 가슴에 대 주어 아기가 모유를 먹을 수 있게 도와주었어요.
그리곤 아기를 아름답게 만들어진 귀여운 아기 침대에 눕혔어요.
그 후 가련한 여인(왕비)이 말했어요.
“제가 왕비인줄은 어디서 들으신 건가요?”
피부가 새하얀 처녀가 대답했어요.
“저는 하느님께서 당신과 당신의 아이를 돌보라며 보낸 천사입니다.”
왕비는 그 귀여운 집에서 장장 7년을 머물며 잘 지냈답니다. 그리고 그녀를 불쌍히 여긴 하느님의 은총을 입어 그녀의 잘린 두 손도 다시 자라나게 되었답니다. 
마침내 왕이 전쟁터에서 돌아왔어요.
그의 첫 번째 소망은 어서 빨리 아내와 아이를 보는 것이었어요.
그때 연로하신 엄마가 울며 말하기 시작했어요.
“이 사악한 놈아, 넌 어찌하여 내게 그 두 죄 없는 영혼들을 죽이라 써 보낸 거냐?”
그러면서 그녀는 왕에게 마왕이 위조한 두 통의 편지들을 보여주었어요.
그녀가 계속 말했어요.
“네 놈 뜻대로 처리했다.”
그녀가 그 증거로 혀와 두 눈을 보여주었어요. 
그러자 왕이 자신의 불쌍한 아내와 귀여운 아들이 불쌍해 엄마(왕의 엄마)가 울었던 거보다 훨씬 더 비통하게 울기 시작했어요.
그에 감동한 연로하신 엄마가 아들에게 말했어요.
“진정 하거라, 그 애는 살아 있다. 내가 암사슴을 죽여 이 증거들을 남긴 거 뿐이다. 하지만 난 아기를 그 애 등에 묶어 보내며 넓은 세상으로 여행을 떠나라 명했다. 그리고 다신 여기로 돌아오지 말라 말했지. 네가 그녀를 보면 분노할 거 같았기 때문이다.”
그때 왕이 말했어요.
“하늘 끝까지 땅 끝까지 찾아다니겠습니다. 다시 제 사랑하는 아내와 아이를 볼 때까진 먹지도 마시지도 않겠습니다. 그들이 살해되거나 굶주려 죽지만은 않았어야 될 건데, 아.”
그런 까닭에 왕은 이후 7년 동안이나 정처 없이 이리저리 헤매며 다니게 되었어요.
모든 바위와 모든 동굴의 갈라진 틈이란 틈은 다 뒤졌어요.
하지만 그 어디에도 그녀의 모습은 보이지 않았어요. 그녀를 다시 보고 싶어 죽고 싶은 심정이었어요.
이 기간 동안 그는 전혀 먹지도 마시지도 않았어요. 오직 하느님에게만 의지하며 나아갔죠.
마침내 그가 어느 울창한 숲에 다다랐을 때, 거기 있던 작고 귀여운 집의 표지판에 이렇게 적혀 있는 거예요.
“누구든 자유로이 여기 머물 수 있노라.”
그때 피부가 새하얀 처녀가 나오더니 그의 손을 잡고 안으로 이끌며 말했어요.
“어서 오세요, 국왕폐하.”
그녀가, 국왕폐하는 지금 어디서 오시는 길인지 물었어요.
그가 대답했어요.
“7년 동안 온 천지를 여행하고 다녔소. 내 아내와 아이를 찾아서 말이오. 하지만 그 어디에도 그들의 모습을 찾을 순 없었소.”
천사가 그에게 고기와 마실 것을 내주었어요.
하지만 그는 어떤 것도 입에 대려하지 않았어요. 단지 쉬기만 바랄 뿐이었어요.
그런 다음 그는 손수건 하나를 자기 얼굴에 올린 채로 누워서 잠이 들었어요. 
그런 까닭에 그 천사가 왕비가 그녀의 아들과 함께 앉아 있던 침실로 들어갔어요.
왕비는 평소 자신의 아들을 “슬픔”이라 불렀어요.
천사가 그녀에게 말했어요.
“아이와 함께 나와 보십시오, 당신의 남편이 저기와 계십니다.” 
그래서 왕비가 남편이 누워 있는 곳으로 가보았어요.
그리고 그의 얼굴에서 손수건이 떨어졌어요.
그때 그녀(왕비)가 말했어요.
“슬픔아, 네 아빠의 손수건을 주어 얼굴에 다시 덮어드리거라.”
아이가 그걸 주어 다시 얼굴에 덮어드렸어요.
잠결에 왕이 이 모두를 들었어요. 그가 기뻐서 그 손수건을 다시 떨어뜨렸어요.
하지만 아이가 극성을 부리며 말했어요.
“엄마, 왜 내가 아빠 얼굴을 덮어드려야 하는 건데, 이승(=현실세계)엔 아빠 없잖아? 기도드릴 때도 ‘우리 하느님 아버지’라고 배웠단 말이야. 엄마도 나한테 내 아빠는 하늘나라에 계시다 했잖아, 선한 하느님 말이야, 이렇게 거친 남자를 내가 어떻게 알아? 그는 내 아빠일 리가 없어.”
왕이 그 말을 듣고 일어나며 그들이 누군지 물었습니다.
그때 그녀(왕비)가 말했어요.
“저는 당신의 아내요, 얘는 당신의 아들인 ‘슬픔’입니다.”
그리고 그(왕)는 그녀의 생생한 두 손을 보았어요.
그(왕)가 말했어요.
“내 아내는 은으로 만든 손을 가지고 있는데.”
그녀가 대답했어요.
“선한 하느님이 제 본래의 손을 다시 나게 해주셨어요.”
그때 천사가 골방(작은방)으로 가 은으로 된 두 손을 가지고 와 왕께 보여주었어요.
이 결과로써 왕은 그들이 틀림없는 자신의 사랑하는 아내와 귀여운 아들임을 확신하게 되었어요.
그가 그들에게 키스를 해주며 기뻐 말했어요.
“이제야 내 마음을 찍어 누르던 묵직한 돌에서 해방되었도다.”  
그런 다음 하느님의 천사가 그들에게 한 끼 식사를 내주셨어요.
맛있게 먹은 후 그들은 왕의 연로하신 엄마가 계신 집으로 돌아갔답니다.
왕국 도처에 거대한 기쁨의 물결이 샘솟았어요. 
그리고 왕과 왕비님은 다시 결혼식을 올렸어요.
그들은 생이 다할 때까지 행복하게 잘 사셨어요.


(동화 끝)

동화 「손 없는 소녀」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「손 없는 소녀」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter31.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



32. 똑똑한 한스



(1일)

한스(영어이름 ‘존’을 독일어식으로 부르면 ‘한스’임)의 엄마가 말했어요.
“어디 가니, 한스야?”
한스가 대답했어요.
“그레텔(한스를 좋아하는 여인이름)에게요.”
“예의바르게 행동해야 한다, 한스야.”
“네, 잘 다녀올게요. 안녕, 엄마.”
“그래, 한스.”

한스가 그레텔에게 왔어요.
“안녕, 그레텔.”
“응 안녕 한스. 좋은 거라도 가져왔니?”
“아무것도 안 가져왔는데. 네가 주면 안 돼?”
그레텔이 선물로 한스에게 바늘 하나를 주었어요.
한스가 말했어요.
“잘 있어, 그레텔.”
“잘 가, 한스.”
한스는 그 바늘을 들고 가다, 수레의 건초더미(=풀)에 콕 찔러 넣어둔 다음 수레를 따라 집으로 왔어요.

“(저녁인사) 다녀왔어요, 엄마.”
“그래, 한스. 지금까지 어디 있었니?”
“그레텔 네 집에요.”
“그래 그 애에게 뭘 주고 왔니?”
“아뇨 전혀요. 도리어 제게 뭘 주던데요.”
“그레텔이 네게 무얼 주던?”
“제게 바늘 하나를 주었어요.”
“그 바늘은 어디 있니, 한스?”
“수레의 건초더미에 콕 찔러두었어요.”
“그럼 안 돼, 한스. 바늘을 네 옷소매에 찔러두었어야지.”
“명심할게요. 다음엔 잘 할게용~♥”

(2일. 대화가 반복됨)

“어디 가니, 한스야?”
“그레텔(한스를 좋아하는 여인이름)에게요.”
“예의바르게 행동해야 한다, 한스야.”
“넵, 잘 다녀올게요. 안녕, 엄마.”
“그래, 한스.”

한스가 그레텔에게 왔어요.
“안녕, 그레텔.”
“응 안녕 한스. 좋은 거라도 가져왔니?”
“아무것도 안 가져왔는데. 네가 주면 안 돼?”
그레텔이 선물로 한스에게 나이프(칼) 하나를 주었어요.
“잘 있어, 그레텔.”
“잘 가, 한스.”
한스는 그 나이프(칼)를 들고 가다, 자신의 옷소매에 콕 찔러둔 다음 집으로 갔어요.

“(저녁인사) 다녀왔어요, 엄마.”
“그래, 한스. 지금까지 어디 있었니?”
“그레텔 네 집에요.”
“그래 그 애에게 뭘 주었니?”
“아뇨 아무것도요. 도리어 제게 뭘 주던데요.”
“그레텔이 네게 무얼 주던?”
“제게 나이프(칼) 하나를 주었어요.”
“그 나이프(칼) 어디 있니, 한스야?”
“제 옷소매 안에 콕 찔러두었어요.”
“그럼 안 된다, 한스. 나이프(칼)를 네 호주머니 속에 넣었어야지.”
“명심할게요. 다음엔 더 잘 할게용~♥”

(3일. 대화가 반복됨)

“어디 가니, 한스야?”
“그레텔(한스를 좋아하는 여인이름)에게요.”
“예의바르게 행동해야 한다, 한스야.”
“넵, 잘 다녀올게요. 안녕, 엄마.”
“그래, 한스.”

한스가 그레텔에게 왔어요.
“안녕, 그레텔.”
“응 안녕 한스. 좋은 거라도 가져왔니?”
“아무것도 안 가져왔는데. 네가 주면 안 돼?”
그레텔이 선물로 한스에게 새끼염소 한 마리를 주었어요.
“잘 있어, 그레텔.”
“잘 가, 한스.”
한스는 새끼염소의 네 다리를 묶어 자신의 호주머니 속에 넣고 갔어요.
그가 집에 도착해서보니 새끼염소는 이미 숨이 막혀 죽어있었어요.

“(저녁인사) 다녀왔어요, 엄마.”
“그래, 한스. 지금까지 어디 있다 왔니?”
“그레텔 네 집에요.”
“그래 그 애에게 뭘 주었니?”
“아뇨 아무것도요. 도리어 제게 뭘 주던데요.”
“그레텔이 네게 무얼 주던?”
“제게 염소 한 마리를 주던걸요.”
“그래 그 염소는 어디 있니, 한스야?”
“제 호주머니 속에 넣어두었어요.”
“그럼 안 된다, 한스야. 끈으로 염소 목을 두른 다음 끌고 와야지.”
“명심할게요. 다음엔 잘 할게용~♥”

(4일. 대화가 반복됨)

“어디 가니, 한스?”
“그레텔(한스를 좋아하는 여인이름)에게요.”
“예의바르게 행동해야 한다, 한스.”
“네, 잘 다녀올게요. 안녕, 엄마.”
“그래, 안녕, 한스.”

한스가 그레텔에게 왔어요.
“안녕, 그레텔.”
“응 안녕 한스. 좋은 거라도 가져왔니?”
“아무것도 안 가져왔는데. 네가 주면 안 돼?”
그레텔이 선물로 한스에게 베이컨(삼겹살) 한 조각을 주었어요.
“잘 있어, 그레텔.”
“잘 가, 한스.”
한스는 그 베이컨(삼겹살)을 끈으로 묶은 다음 바닥에 질질 끌며 갔어요.
그러자 개들이 마구 달려들어 게걸스럽게 그 베이컨을 먹어치웠답니다.
그가 집에 도착해서보니 손엔 끈만 달랑 있고 내용물은 그 어디에도 없었어요.

“(저녁인사) 다녀왔어요, 엄마.”
“그래, 한스. 어디 있다 오는 거니?”
“그레텔 네 집이요.”
“그래 그 애에게 뭘 주었니?”
“아뇨 아무것도요. 도리어 제게 뭘 주던데요.”
“그레텔이 네게 뭘 주던?”
“제게 베이컨 한 조각을 주던데요.”
“그래 그 베이컨 어디 있니, 한스야?”
“제가 끈에 묶어 끌고 왔는데 개들이 다 먹어치워 버렸어요.” 
“그럼 안 된다, 한스. 베이컨을 네 머리 위에 이고(얹고) 왔어야지.”
“명심할게요. 다음엔 더 잘 할게용~♥”

(5일. 대화가 반복됨)

“어디 가니, 한스?”
“그레텔(한스를 좋아하는 여인이름)에게요.”
“예의바르게 행동해야 한다, 한스.”
“네, 잘 다녀올게요. 안녕, 엄마.”
“그래, 한스.”

한스가 그레텔에게 왔어요.
“안녕, 그레텔.”
“응 안녕 한스. 좋은 거라도 가져왔니?”
“아무것도 안 가져왔는데. 하지만 주면 받을게?”
그레텔이 선물로 한스에게 송아지 한 마리를 주었어요.
“잘 있어, 그레텔.”
“잘 가, 한스.”

한스는 그 송아지를 머리에 이고(얹고) 오는데, 송아지가 한스의 얼굴을 마구 찼어요(때렸어요).

“(저녁인사) 다녀왔어요, 엄마.”
“그래, 한스. 지금까지 어디 있다 왔니?”
“그레텔 네 집이요.”
“그래 그 애에게 뭘 주었니?”
“아뇨 아무것도요. 도리어 제게 뭘 주던데요.”
“그레텔이 네게 무얼 주던?”
“송아지 한 마리요.”
“그래 그 송아지는 어디 있니, 한스?”
“제 머리에 이고(얹고) 왔는데 그게 제 얼굴을 계속 걷어찼어요.” 
“그럼 안 된다, 한스. 송아지는 끌어와 외양간(소를 기르는 곳)에 메어두는 거란다.”
“명심할게요. 다음엔 잘 할게용~♥”

(6일. 대화가 반복됨)

“어디 가니, 한스?”
“그레텔(한스를 좋아하는 여인이름)에게요, 엄마.”
“예의바르게 행동해야 한다, 한스야.”
“네, 잘 다녀올게요. 안녕, 엄마.”
“그래, 한스.”

한스가 그레텔에게 왔어요.
“안녕, 그레텔.”
“응 안녕 한스. 좋은 거라도 가져왔니?”
“아무것도 안 가져왔는데. 하지만 주면 받을게?”
그레텔이 한스에게 말했어요.
“나 너랑 같이 갈래.”
한스는 그레텔을 끈으로 묶은 다음 ‘시렁’(=막대기. 방의 벽에 옆으로 길게 매단 두 개의 막대기. 시렁 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/X7PCRa )으로 끌고 가 꽁꽁 묶어놓았어요.
그런 다음 한스는 자기 엄마에게 갔어요.

“(저녁인사) 다녀왔어요, 엄마.”
“그래, 한스. 지금까지 어디 있다 왔니?”
“그레텔 네 집이요.”
“그래 그 애에게 뭘 주었니?”
“전 아무것도 안 주었어요.”
“그럼 그레텔이 네게 뭘 주던?”
“제게 아무것도 안 주었어요, 그냥 저를 따라 오던 걸요.”
“그래 그레텔은 어디 있니, 한스?”
“끈으로 끌고 와 시렁(=막대기)에 묶어놓고 그녀를 위해 잔디를 좀 흩뿌려주고 왔어요.”
“그럼 안 된다, 한스. 여자에겐 상냥한 시선(=눈)을 던져주는 거란다.”
“명심할게요. 잘 할게용~♥”
한스는 ‘마구간’(=외양간=소의 집)으로 들어가 송아지와 양의 눈이란 눈은 죄다 뽑아와 그테텔의 얼굴에다 던져주었어요.(한스는 엄마가 말한 시선을 눈으로 오해함)
이쯤 되자 그레텔도 바보 한스에게 화가 머리끝까지 나, 스스로 그 끈을 풀고 달아났다 다른 남자의 신부가 되었답니다.


(동화 끝)

동화 「똑똑한 한스」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「똑똑한 한스」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter32.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



33. 세 가지 언어



스위스에 나이 많은 ‘백작’(귀족의 작위 중 세 번째로 높음) 한 명이 살고 있었어요.
그는 아들만 딱 한 명 있었는데, 이 애가 너무나 바보라 아무것도 배우질 못하는 거예요.
그래서 아빠가 말했어요.
“잘 듣거라, 내 아들아, 나도 더는 네 머리에 뭘 넣을 수 없구나, 그래서 내가 생각한 게 하나 있다. 넌 일단 여길 떠나, 저명한 스승 밑에서 배우게 될 게다. 그 분이 너를 잘 인도해줄 것이다.”
젊은이는 그리하여 낮선 도시에 보내져 1년을 온전히 그 스승 밑에 머물렀어요.
1년이 지나고 아들이 집으로 다시 돌아왔을 때, 아빠가 물었어요.
“그래, 내 아들아, 무얼 배워왔느냐?”
“아부지, 저는 개들이 멍멍 찢을 때 개들이 뭐라 말하는 지를 배우고 돌아왔어요.”
“아이고 내 팔자야!”라며 아빠가 소리쳤어요. “내가 지금 그거 배우라고 널 거기 보낸 줄 아느냐? 안 되겠다, 이번엔 다른 도시에 있는 다른 스승에게 너를 보내야겠다.”
그리하여 젊은이는 거기로 보내져, 1년을 온전히 그 스승과 함께 머물었어요.
아들이 돌아오자 아빠가 또다시 물었어요.
“내 아들아, 그래 무얼 배우고 돌아왔느냐?”
아들이 대답했어요.
“아부지, 저는 새들이 말하는 것을 배우고 돌아왔어요.”
이 밀에 아빠가 버럭 분통을 터뜨리며 말했어요.
“아이고, 이 멍청한 놈아, 그깟 걸 배우라도 널 그 비싼 곳에 보낸 줄 아느냐. 그러고 돌아온 게 부끄럽지도 않느냐? 안 되겠다, 이번엔 너를 세 번째 스승에게 보내야 겠다. 만약 이번에도 멍청한 것만 배워오면 내 그땐 너를 아들로 생각하지 않겠다.”
젊은이는 1년을 온전히 이 세 번째 스승 밑에 머물렀어요.
아들이 다시 집으로 돌아온 날 아빠가 물었어요. 
“그래 내 아들아, 무얼 배워 돌아왔느냐?”라고 아빠가 물었어요.
“사랑하는 아부지, 이번 년도에는 개구리들이 개골개골 우는 소리를 배우고 돌아왔어요.”
그러자 아빠가 불같이 화를 내며 벌떡 일어나 하인들을 불러들였다. 
아빠가 말했다. 
“이 놈은 더는 내 아들이 아니다. 그러니 너희들은 이놈을 숲으로 데려가 죽이고 오거라.”
하인들이 아들을 데리고 가 죽이려고 보니, 동정심이 생기는 걸 피할 수가 없었어요.
그래서 그들은 아들을 풀어주었어요.
대신 사슴의 눈과 혀를 잘라내 그걸 아들이 죽은 증거라며 노인(백작. 아버지)에게 들고 갔어요.
이제 젊은이는 방랑하게 되었어요.
일정 시간이 지난 후 그가 하룻밤 묵고 가려고 어느 ‘성채’(=요새)에 도착했어요.
“좋다.”라며 성의 영주(주인)가 말했어요. “다만 이 근처에 오래된 탑이 하나 있는데 자넨 거기서 오늘 밤을 보내야하네, 그쪽에 가보게, 내 미리 경고하는데, 오늘밤이 자네 제삿날이 될 수도 있다네. 왜냐면 거긴 들개들로 가득한 곳이거든, 들개들이 한시도 쉬지 않고 짖고 울어대지. 정해진 시간에 사람을 그들에게 주는데, 그럼 그들이 순식간에 먹어치워 버린다네.”
이 지역은 그 들개들 때문에 온통 슬픔과 당황이 거칠 날이 없었어요. 아직껏 어느 누구도 그 들개들을 물리칠 순 없었거든요.
하지만 그 젊은이는 전혀 두렵지 않았어요. 그래서 말했어요.
”제가 그 짖는다는 개들에게로 내려가 보겠습니다. 제가 그들에게 던져줄 음식이나 주십시오. 그들은 저를 전혀 해치지 않을 겁니다.“
그가 자진해서 나섰기 때문에, 사람들은 들개들에게 줄 음식을 그 젊은이에게 주고 그를 탑으로 안내했다. 
젊은이가 탑 안으로 들어가자 정말 들개들이 아무도 그를 보고 짖질 않았다. 
더구나 젊은이 주변에 둥글게 모여들며 친밀함의 표시로 자신들의 꼬리를 흔들기에 바빴다. 그리고 그가 앞에 놓아두는 음식들을 개들은 먹었다. 
다음날 아침 젊은이가 정말 머리카락 한 올 다치지 않고 안전한 모습으로 다시 나타나자 모여 있던 모든 사람들이 놀라워했다. 
그가 성의 영주(주인)에게 말했다. 
”개들이 자기들만의 언어로 제게 털어놓은 얘기가 하나 있습니다. 그들이 거기 왜 머물고 있는지 왜 거기서 물의를 일으키고 있는지 하는 얘기였습니다. 그 개들은 모두 마법에 걸려 탑 밑에 있는 엄청난 양의 보물을 지키는 일을 맡고 있었습니다. 누가 그 보물을 꺼내가야지만 개들도 마법에서 풀려나게 되는 것입니다. 이게 제가 그들의 얘기를 통해 알게 된 사실입니다.“ 
그 말을 들은 모든 사람들이 기뻐했어요.
성의 영주(주인)가 만약 젊은이가 그걸 성공적으로 해내면 자신의 양자(아들)로 삼겠다 말했어요.
젊은이가 다시 내려갔어요. 물론 이번엔 자신이 어떻게 해야 할지를 잘 알고 있었죠. 밤사이 젊은이가 성공적으로 일을 마쳤어요.
황금이 가득 든 궤짝(대형 상자)를 꺼내 왔거든요.
그날 이후로 들개들의 울부짖음이 더는 들리지도 않았고 들개들의 모습도 싹 다 사라졌지요.
그리하여 그 지역사람들도 골칫거리에서 해방되게 되었답니다. 
일정 시간이 지난 후, 젊은이는 문득 자신이 로마(이탈리아 로마)로 여행을 떠나야겠다는 마음이 들었어요.
가는 도중에 습지를 지나게 되었는데, 거기엔 수많은 개구들이들이 개골개골 대화들을 나누며 앉아 있었어요.
그는 그들의 대화에 귀를 기울여보았어요. 그들이 무슨 말을 나누고 있는지를 깨닫자 그는 많은 생각에 잠겨 슬퍼했어요.
마침내 그가 로마에 도착했어요.
거기선 교황님께서 막 숨을 거두셨어요.
그래서 사람들 사이에서 누구를 교황님의 후계자로 할지에 대해 큰 어려움이 있었어요.
마침내 사람들은 신성하고 기적적인 징후로 구별되는 이를 다음 교황님으로 뽑자는데 동의했어요.
그것이 결정되자마자, 그 젊은이가 교회에 막 들어선 거죠.
그때 갑자기 두 마리 새하얀 비둘기들이 그의 어깨 위에 날아와 앉더니 계속 앉아 있었어요.
그 점이 성직자들에겐 하늘의 징후로 여겨졌어요.
그래서 그 젊은이에게 교황이 될 용의가 있는지 물어보았지요.
그는 선득 결론을 내리지 못했어요. 또한 자신이 그 직책에 적합한지도 몰랐고요.
하지만 비둘기들이 젊은이에게 어찌어찌 행동하라고 조언을 해주자 마침내 그도 “네.”라고 말했어요. 
그런 다음 그 젊은이의 머리에 기름이 부어지고 성직에 임명되었어요.
그리하여 오는 도중, 그가 ‘성하’(=교황의 존칭)가 될 거라고 말한 개구리들의 호감 가득한 얘기가 다 이루어졌어요.
그런 다음 다 같이 노래(성가)를 부르는데, 그는 가사를 하나도 몰랐어요, 하지만 그의 두 어깨 위에 앉아 있던 비둘기들이 끊임없이 노래가사를 그의 귀에다 알려주었답니다.

(동화 끝)

동화 「세 가지 언어」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「세 가지 언어」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter33.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



34. 똑똑한 엘시



옛날 옛적에 똑똑한 ‘엘시’라고 불리는 딸아이를 가진 남자가 한 명 살고 있었어요.
아이가 자라자 아빠가 말했어요.
“우리도 이제 딸애를 결혼시켜야겠어.”
“그래요.”라며 애 엄마도 말했어요. “그 애에게 어울릴만한 남자만 나타나면요.”
마침내 한 남자가 멀리서 와 그녀에게 청혼을 했어요. 그의 이름은 ‘한스’였어요.
하지만 그는 조건을 하나 걸었어요. 즉 똑똑한 엘시가 정말로 지혜로운지 봐야겠다는 거예요.
“오,”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “엄청 똑똑하고말고.”
엄마도 말했어요. “오, 그 애는 거리에 부는 바람도 볼 수 있고, 파리가 콜록콜록 기침하는 소리도 들을 수 있어요.”
“그래도,”라며 한스가 말했어요. “그녀가 정말 지혜로운 게 아니라면 결혼하지 않겠습니다.”
그들이 식탁에 앉아 함께 저녁식사를 들 때, 엄마가 말했어요.
“엘시야, 지하실로 가서 맥주를 좀 가져오거라.”
그래서 똑똑한 엘시가 벽에 걸린 물주전자를 쥐고 지하실로 내려가 뚜껑을 기분 좋게 뽑았어요. 그리 오래 걸릴 거 같지 않았어요.
그녀가 아래로 의자를 가져와 맥주 통 앞에 놓았어요. 이제 몸을 구부릴 필요가 없어 등을 다칠 일도 어떤 예기치 않은 상처를 입을 일도 없어졌어요. 
그런 다음 그녀는 자기 앞에 통을 놓고 마개(뚜껑)를 돌렸어요. 
맥주가 콸콸 흘러나오는 동안에도 그녀의 시선은 가만있질 않았어요.
하지만 시선을 여기 저기 왔다 갔다 한 다음 벽을 올려다보았을 때 그녀 바로 위에 ‘벽돌공’(벽돌을 쌓는 사람)이 우연히 놓고 간 ‘곡괭이’(땅을 파는 도구. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/PGukG2 )가 보였어요.
똑똑한 엘시가 울기 시작했어요.
그녀가 말했어요.
“내가 한스와 결혼해 아이를 낳으면 아이가 커고 그럼 우리가 그 애보고 지하실 여기로 가 맥주를 담아오라 시킬 건데, 그러다 곡괭이가 아이 머리 위에 떨어져 죽을 거잖아.”
그녀는 앉아 온 힘을 다해 앙앙 울며 소리쳤어요. 
미래의 불행에 억장이 무너진 거죠.
위에선 모두들 마실 것만 기다리고 있었어요. 
하지만 똑똑한 엘시가 여전히 오지 않지 뭐예요.
그래서 엄마는 하녀에게 말했어요.
“한 번 지하실로 내려가 엘시가 있는가 보고 오련.”
하녀가 내려가 보니 엘시가 맥주 통 앞에 앉아 큰 소리로 앙앙 울고 있지 뭐예요.
“엘시, 너 왜 우니?”라고 하녀가 물었어요.
“아,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “내가 지금 안 울게 되었어? 내가 한스와 살면 애를 낳을 거고 그럼 그 애가 커면 이리로 맥주 담아 오는 심부름을 하게 될 건데 그러다 혹(혹시라도) 곡괭이가 그 애 머리 위로 떨어져 죽기라도 하면 어째.”
그러자 하녀가 말했어요. “너 정말 똑똑하구나, 엘시!” 
그러면서 하녀도 그녀 옆에 앉아 큰 소리로 이 미래의 불행에 울기 시작했어요.
잠시 후 하녀마저 돌아오지 않자, 위에선 맥주를 마시고 싶어 목이 타 들어가는 듯 했어요.
그래서 아빠가 하인에게 말했어요.
“네가 좀 지하실로 내려가서, 엘시와 하녀가 거기 있나 보고 와라.”
하인이 내려가 보니 똑똑한 엘시와 하녀 둘 다 함께 울고 있지 뭐예요.
하인이 물었어요.
“너희 왜 우니?”
“아,”라며 엘시가 말했어요. “내가 지금 안 울게 생겼어? 내가 한스와 결혼하면 애가 생길 거고, 그럼 그 애가 자라 여기로 맥주를 담으러 와야 할 텐데 그러다 곡괭이가 애 머리 위로 떨어져 애가 죽기라도 하면 어쩌라고.”
그러자 하인이 말했어요.
“정말 똑똑하구나, 엘시!”
하인은 그러면서 그녀 옆에 앉아 똑같이 큰 소리로 울부짖기 시작했어요.
위층에선 하인을 기다렸지만, 간 사람이 오질 않는 거예요.
그래서 남편이 아내보고 말했어요.
“아무래도 당신이 지하실로 좀 내려가 보구려, 거기 엘시가 있나 보고 와요!”
아내가 내려가 보니 얘 네들이 모두 함께 모여 앉아선 대성통곡들을 하고 있는 거예요.
그래서 이게 대체 무슨 일이냐고 물었지요.
그러자 엘시가 엄마에게 마찬가지로 대답하길,
“장차 애가 생겨 크면 맥주를 담아오는 심부름을 하게 될 텐데 그럼 곡괭이가 떨어져 죽지 않겠어.”
라고 했어요.
엄마 또한 마찬가지로 얘기하길,
“이렇게 영특할 수가 있나, 우리 애기!”
엄마는 그러면서 주저앉아 그들과 함께 울었어요.
아빠는 잠시 위층에서 기다려보았지만 아내가 돌아오지 않고, 목도 탈 듯이 말라오자, 말했어요.
“아무래도 내가 직접 지하실로 내려가 엘시가 거기 있나 보고 와야겠어.”
하지만 그가 지하실로 들어섰을 때, 그들이 모두 울며 앉아 있는 거예요.
아빠가 그 이유를 물으니, 엘시의 미래의 아이가 그 이유였어요.
“엘시가 나중에라도 출산을 하게 되면, 자라서 맥주를 담아오는 심부름을 왔다 저 곡괭이 밑에 혹시라도 앉게 되고 그러다 그만 곡괭이가 떨어져 죽지 않겠어요!”
그래서 아빠도 주저앉아 그들과 함께 마찬가지로 울기 시작했어요.
신랑은 위층에서 한 참을 홀로 머물러 있었어요.
그래도 아무도 돌아오지 않자 신랑은 생각했어요.
“가만 있자 모두들 아래에서 나를 기다리고 있는 게 아닐까. 그럼 내가 내려가 뭔 일인지 알아봐야겠군.”
그가 내려가 보니, 다섯 사람 모두가 애간장이 녹는다는 듯 울고불고 하며 앉아 있지 뭐예요.
그들은 서로 더 크게 우는 경쟁을 하고 있는 듯 보였어요.
“아이고 이 무슨 야단들이십니까?”라며 그가 물었어요. 
“아, 사랑하는 한스,”라며 엘시가 말했어요. “우리가 결혼하면 아이를 가질 거잖아, 그럼 그 아이가 나중에 자라 혹시라도 마실 걸 담으러 여기로 심부름을 오게 될 수 있을 거고, 그럼 저기 걸려 있는 곡괭이가 그 애 머리위로 떨어져 죽을 수 있을 텐데, 지금 우리가 안 울고 배기겠냐고?”
“음,”라며 한스가 말했어요. “집안일을 하는데 그 이상의 이해력은 필요 없소. 당신이 똑똑한 엘시인 게 판명 났으니 난 당신과 결혼하리다.”
한스는 그렇게 말하곤 그녀의 손을 잡고 위층으로 올라가 결혼식을 올렸어요.
그 후 머지않아 한스가 말했어요.
“여보, 나는 나가 일을 해 돈을 좀 벌어볼 테니, 당신은 들판으로 가 우리가 빵을 만들 밀을 좀 베어와요.”
“네, 사랑하는 한스, 그렇게 할게요.”
한스가 외출한 후, 그녀가 자신이 먹을 맛난 고기 수프를 만들어가지고 들판으로 들고 갔어요.
들판에 도착한 그녀가 혼잣말로 말했어요.
“가만 보자, 먼저 밀을 벨까, 아님 이 고기 수프를 먼저 먹을까? 그래, 먼저 먹자.”
고기 수프를 한 스푼까지 ‘싹 다’(전부) 비운 후(먹어 치운 후) 배도 부르고 만족감도 듬뿍해진 그녀가 한 번 더 말했어요.
“뭘 하지? 밀을 벨까, 아님 일단 좀 잘까? 그래 먼저 자자.”
그런 다음 그녀가 밀 사이에 누워 쿨쿨 잠이 들었어요.
한스는 집에서 한참을 기다렸지만 엘시가 돌아오지 않자 말했어요.
“아이고 우리 똑똑한 엘시가 정말 열심히도 일을 하는 모양이네, 밥 먹으로 집에도 안 오는 거 보면.”
하긴 지금 밤이 다 되었음에도 그녀가 들어오지 않고 있었으니까요.
한스는 그녀가 얼마만큼 밀을 베었는지 보려고 가보았어요.
그런데 에계계 밀이 하나도 안 베어져 있는 거예요. 그리고 그녀는 밀 사이에 드러누워 쿨쿨 자빠져 자고 있고요.
그래서 한스가 허겁지겁 집으로 달려가, 작은 방울들이 달린 ‘새잡는 그물’을 가져와 그녀 옷에 주렁주렁 매달았어요. 물론 그녀는 그러는 와중에도 계속 자고 있었고요.
그런 다음 한스는 집으로 달려가 현관문을 꽉 잠그곤 자기 의자에 앉아 일을 했어요.
한참 후 날이 완전히 어두워졌을 때 똑똑한 엘시가 깨어나 일어나보니 자기 몸 여기저기서 “딸랑! 딸랑!” 소리가 나지 뭐예요. 게다가 그 방울 소리들은 그녀가 한 발 한 발 내디딜 때마다 울리고 있었어요.
그러자 화들짝 놀란 그녀가 자신이 진짜 똑똑한 엘시인지 아닌지 확실치가 않지 뭐예요.
그래서 그녀가 말했어요.
“긴가, 민가(아닌가)?”
하지만 그녀로선 이 물음에 답을 할 수 없었죠. 한참을 어리둥절해하며 서 있던 그녀가 마침내 생각해냈어요.
“집에 가서 내가 정말 그녀인지 아닌지 물어보자, 사람들은 분명 알테니까.”
그녀가 자기 집의 문에 도착해보니 문이 닫혀있지 뭐예요.
그때 그녀가 창문을 두드리며 소리쳤어요.
“한스, 엘시 안에 있나요?”
“네,”라며 한스가 대답했어요. “안에 있어요.”
그 말에 그녀가 화들짝 놀라며 탄식을 하나 내뱉었어요.
“오, 하느님! 그럼 이게 내가 아닌 가봐.”
그녀가 다른 집의 문으로 갔어요.
하지만 사람들은 “딸랑! 딸랑!” 울리는 방울소리 탓에 절대 문을 열어주지 않으려했어요.
이리하여 그녀로선 갈 때가 아무데도 없게 되었어요.
그런 다음 그녀는 그 마을을 떠났고요, 그 후 아무도 그녀의 모습을 본 사람이 없었어요.

(동화 끝)

동화 「똑똑한 엘시」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「똑똑한 엘시」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter34.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



35. 천국에 간 재단사



어느 아주 멋진 날, 선한 하느님께서 천국의 정원으로 나들이를 가시고 싶어졌어요.
그래서 ‘사도’(예수님의 12제자들)들과 ‘성인’(순교자나 거룩한 신앙생활을 한 사람. 교황청이 선포함)들을 모두 데리고 가졌어요.
그 바람에 천국엔 아무도 안 남게 되었어요.
물론 ‘성 베드로’(예수님의 제자. 사도직의 대표자)만 빼고요.  
하느님은 베드로에게 자신이 없는 동안 아무도 들이지 말라 명하셨어요.
그래서 베드로가 천국의 문 옆에 딱 버티고 서서 감시를 하였더래요.
그런데 머지않아 똑똑 노크소리가 들려 “거기 누구냐? 무엇을 바라느냐?”라고 베드로가 물었어요.
“저는 정직하고 가련한 ‘재단사’(옷감을 치수대로 자르는 사람. 재단사=패턴사. 자른 옷감을 재봉질 하는 사람이 재봉사)입니다요, 간절히 바라옵건대 저를 들여보내주옵시면 해서요.”라며 부드러운 목소리가 대답했어요.
“교수대 위의 도둑 같이,”라며 베드로가 말했어요. “퍽도 정직하렸다! 네 나쁜 손버릇으로 슬쩍 슬쩍 빼돌린 옷감들만 해도 그 얼마더냐. 널 천국에 들일 순 없다. 하느님께선 자신이 안 계신 동안 어느 누구도 들이지 말라 명하셨노라.”
“아, 자비를 베풀어주옵소서.”라며 그 재단사가 울었어요.
(재단사의 대사 계속→) “치수대로 자르고 남은 것들이 책상 밑으로 조금 떨어진겁니다요, 그걸 훔쳤다 말할 수 없습니다요 값나가는 것도 아니었고요. 보십시오, 저는 절름발이이고, 여기까지 걸어오느라 제 두 발은 물집도 많이 생겨 돌아갈 수도 없게 생겼습니다요. 한번만 들여보내주시면 힘든 일도 마다하지 않을 거고 아이들도 돌보고 세탁도 해드리고 설거지며 아이들이 노는 의자들 청소며 찢어진 옷들을 바느질하는 것을 도맡아하겠습니다요.”
그가 처량해보였던 성 베드로가 천국의 문을 그 절름발이가 자신의 홀쭉한 몸을 간신히 들이밀며 통과할 수 있을 만큼만 열어주었어요.
그런 다음 하느님께서 돌아오시고 그를 보고 호통을 치실 수 있기에 일단 재단사보고는 문 뒤편 구석에 가만히 앉아 있어라 말했어요.
재단사는 그 말에 따랐어요.
하지만 성 베드로가 다시 문을 지키려 천국의 문 밖으로 나가자, 재단사는 자리에서 일어났답니다. 호기심이 생겨 천국의 구석구석을 돌아다녔지요. 모든 장소들이 어떻게 꾸며져 있는지도 탐색하면서요.
그러다 재단사는 수많은 아름답고 기품 있는 의자들이 서 있는 한 장소에 다다르게 되었어요.
그 한가운데에 온통 금으로 되어 있고 빛나는 보석들이 박혀 있는 좌석이 하나 있었는데, 다른 의자들보다 훨씬 높고, 앞에 황금 발판도 하나 놓여 있었어요.
그건 두말할 필요도 없이, 하느님이 집에 계실 때 착석하시는 좌석이었어요.
거기 앉아 지상에서 벌어지는 모든 일들을 보시는 거죠.
재단사는 감탄해마지 않아하며 가만히 서서 한동안 그 좌석을 물끄러미 바라보았어요.
정말 탐이 났거든요.
마침내 호기심에 굴복당한 그가 기어 올라가 그만 의자에 앉고 말았어요.
그러자 그의 눈에 지상에서 벌어지고 있는 모든 게 보이는 거예요.
때마침 저기 아래에 있는 시냇가에서 어느 못생긴 노파 한 명이 손빨래를 하다말고 몰래 면사포(얼굴을 가리는 흰 천) 두 개를 자기 한쪽으로 슬쩍하는(빼돌리는) 거예요.
이 광경을 본 재단사가 화를 내며 황금 발판을 집어 들곤 그걸 천국에서 지상 아래로 그 늙은 도둑을 향해 내던지고 말았어요. 
하지만 그 때문에 지상으로 떨어진 그 발판을 다시 가져올 수 없었지요. 그가 조용히 의자에서 미끄러져 내려와 문 뒤편에 있는 자기 자리로 가 쭈그려 앉았어요. 마치 자기는 절대 그 의자에 앉지 않았다는 식으로요.
그 발판의 주인이신 하느님이 자신의 천국 벗들과 함께 돌아왔어요.
그런데 에계계 좌석에 앉고 보니 발판이 없지 뭐예요.
하느님께서 성 베드로에게 “발판 어디 갔느냐?”고 물으셨지만, 베드로로선 알 길이 없었지요.
그러자 “그 사이에 누구 들여보낸 사람이라도 있느냐?”고 하느님이 성 베드로에게 물으셨어요.
“아무도 없었사옵니다.”라며 베드로가 대답했어요. “다만 지금 저 문 뒤에 앉아 있는 절음발이 재단사 한 명 빼고는요.”
그러자 하느님께서 재단사를 앞으로 부르시곤 “발판을 가져갔는가? 그렇담 어디에 두었는가?”라고 물으셨어요. 
“오, 하느님,”라며 재단사가 기쁨에 차 대답했어요. “빨래를 하다 면사포 두 개를 빼돌리는 노파를 발견하고 제가 화가 나 지상으로 그걸 내던졌습니다요.” 
“아, 네가 더 잘 알게다.”라며 하느님이 말씀하셨어요. “내가 너처럼 하였더라면, 네가 이토록 오래 도망 다닐 수 있었겠더냐? 아마 그런 식으로 죄인들에게 하나하나 내던졌다간, 의자며 벤치(긴 의자)며 걸상 ‘오븐용 포크’ 하나까지 죄다 사라지고 없었겠지. 이제 너는 더는 천국에 머물 수 없노라, 그러니 다시 저 문을 나가야한다. 그런 다음 네 좋을 대로 가거라. 여기선 아무도 벌을 내리지 않노라, 오직 나만이 전능한 하느님이기 때문이다.” 
베드로가 말씀에 따라 그 재단사를 천국 문 밖으로 데려가주었어요.
재단사는 구두가 다 찢어지고 두 발이 물집 투성이라, 손에 막대기를 쥐고서 간신히 걸어 “가시(=식물) 돋는 나라”(=‘잠시 머무는 곳’이란 의미도 있음. 독일어원문→‘Warteinweil’. 영어→‘Wait-a-bit’. 우리말→저는 모름ㅋㅋ^^. 독일어사전에도 없는 단어임. 그리고 영어사전에서는 원하는 단어 뜻을 못 찼겠음)란 곳에 도착했어요. 
다행히도 그곳은 착한 군인들이 머물며 웃고 술 마시고 노래하며 즐겁게 떠들고 노는 곳이었답니다. 

(동화 끝)

동화 「천국에 간 재단사」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「천국에 간 재단사」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter35.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



36. 요술 식탁, 황금 당나귀, 자루 속에 든 몽둥이



옛날 옛적에 세 아들을 둔 재봉사가 한 명 살고 있었어요. 그는 또한 염소도 한 마리 가지고 있었어요.
하지만 모든 가족이 염소의 젖에 의지해 먹고 살았답니다.
그러니 염소에겐 좋은 먹이를 먹여야했기에 매일 목초지로 데리고 갔어요.
세 아들들이 교대로 이 일을 했지요.
하루는 첫째가 염소를 데리고 교회 부속의 묘지로 갔어요. 묘지이긴 했어도 거긴 최상급 풀잎들이 자라는 곳이었거든요. 첫째는 염소가 먹으며 여기저기 뛰어놀 수 있도록 해주었어요.
밤이 되어 집에 갈 시간이 되자 첫째가 물었어요.
“염소야, 배부르게 먹었니?”
염소가 대답했어요.
“아주 배부르게 먹었어요. 배가 불러 더는 풀 한 잎도 못 먹겠어요. (울음소리→) 메에! 메에!”
“이제 집에 가자구나.”라며 젊은이가 말했어요.
그는 염소의 목에 두른 끈을 쥐고 마구간(가축우리)으로 데리고 가 단단히 묶어놓았어요.
“그래,”라며 나이 많은 재봉사가 말했어요. “염소가 배부르도록 먹였더냐?”
“오,”라며 아들이 대답했어요. “너무 많이 먹어서 더는 풀 한 잎도 못 먹겠다던데요.”
하지만 아빠는 직접 확인하고 싶어 마구간으로 내려가 사랑스러운 동물을 한 번 톡 치며 물었어요.
“염소야, 배부르니?”
그 염소가 대답했어요.
“원 세상에, 뭔 수로 제가 배부를 수 있겠어요? 무덤 사이만 온통 뛰다왔는걸요. 먹을 게 하나도 없어 쫄쫄 굶어야 했다고요, 메에! 메에!”
“뭐라고?”라며 재봉사가 소리쳤어요. 
그리곤 냉큼 위층으로 달려가 젊은이에게 말했어요.
“뭐, 이 거짓말쟁이야. 염소가 배부르게 먹었다고, 고작 쫄쫄 굶게 한 주제에!”
그러면서 화를 내며 벽에 걸린 긴자(길이를 재는 자)를 들고서 후려치며 아들을 내쫓아버렸어요.
다음날 둘째 아들의 차례가 되었어요.
아들은 정원 울타리 안에 있던 장소를 눈여겨봤던지라 거리로 갔어요. 좋은 풀잎이 자라는 곳으로 그만한 곳이 없었거든요. 
염소도 만족했는지 그곳의 풀잎을 죄다 먹어치웠어요.
밤이 되어 집에 가려고 아들이 물었어요.
“염소야, 배가 부르니?”
염소가 대답했어요.
“네, 배 터지겠어요. 너무 배가 불러 더는 풀 한 잎도 못 먹겠어요. 메에! 메에!”
“그렇담 집에 가자구나.”라며 젊은이가 말했어요.
그는 염소를 집에 데려가 마구간 안에 잘 묶어놓았어요.
“그래,”라며 나이 많은 재봉사가 말했어요. “염소를 든든히 먹였겠지?”
“오,”라며 아들이 대답했어요. “배 터지게 먹었다던데요, 그래서 더는 풀 한 잎도 못 먹겠다 그랬어요.”
그 말에 대답하지 않고 재봉사는 마구간으로 내려가 말했어요.
“염소야, 배부르니?”
그 염소가 대답했어요.
“원 세상에, 뭔 수로 제가 배부를 수 있겠어요? 무덤 사이만 온통 뛰다왔는걸요. 먹을 게 하나도 없어 쫄쫄 굶어야 했다고요, 메에! 메에!”
“이런 빌어먹을 놈이!”라며 재봉사가 소리쳤어요. “이 착한 짐승을 쫄쫄 굶겨.”
그러면서 냉큼 뛰어 올라가 긴자로 때리며 그 젊은이를 문밖으로 내쫗아버렸어요.
이제 막내아들의 차례가 되었어요.
그 일을 잘 해내고 싶던 막내가 맛난 잎사귀들이 가득한 약간의 수풀들을 발견해 그리로 염소를 데려가 맛나게 먹게 했어요.
저녁이 되자 집에 가려고 그가 물었어요.
“염소야, 그래 배부르게 먹었니?”
그 염소가 대답했어요.
“그럼요, 배 터지게 먹은 걸요. 이제 배불러서 더는 한 잎도 못 먹겠어요. 메에! 메에!”  
“그렇담 집에 가자구나.”라며 젊은이는 염소를 마구간으로 데려가 잘 묶어두었어요.
“그래,”라며 나이 많은 재봉사가 말했어요. “염소는 배부르게 먹었다디?”
“네, 너무 많이 먹어서, 더는 한 잎도 못 먹겠다더군요.”
재봉사는 그 말을 신뢰하지 않고, 내려가 물어보았어요.
“염소야, 배부르니?”
사악한 짐승이 대답했어요.
“원 세상에, 뭔 수로 제가 배부를 수 있겠어요? 무덤 사이만 온통 뛰다왔는걸요. 먹을 게 하나도 없어 쫄쫄 굶어야 했다고요, 메에! 메에!”
“오, 이 빌어먹을 거짓말쟁이들 같으니라고!”라며 재봉사가 소리쳤어요. “하나 같이 시킨 일은 안하고 거짓말을 해! 오냐오냐했더니 아버지를 놀려.”
그러면서 분통이 터져 냉큼 위층으로 올라가 불쌍한 막내아들을 긴자(기다란 자. 길이는 재는 자)로 난폭하게 두들겨 패 집에서 내쫓아버렸어요. 
나이 많은 재봉사는 이제 염소와 단둘이만 남게 되었어요.
다음날 아침 그가 마구간으로 내려가 그 염소를 쓰다듬으며 말했어요.
“그래, 내 둘도 없는 짐승아, 오늘은 내가 직접 너를 데리고 가 풀을 먹이마.”
그는 끈에 메고 염소를 데리고 푸른 산울타리로 갔어요. 거긴 ‘서양톱풀’(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/PCXjoO )이 수북한 곳이었어요. 서양톱풀은 염소들이 최고로 좋아하는 것이었지요.
“그래 마음껏 먹으려무나.”라고 그가 염소에게 말했어요. 
염소는 저녁까지 마음껏 그 어린 풀을 먹을 수 있었어요.
그런 다음 그가 물었어요.
“그래 염소야, 배부르니?”
염소가 대답했어요.
“배가 너무 불러 더는 한 잎도 못 먹겠어요. 메에! 메에!”
“좋다, 그렇담 집에 가자구나.”라며 재봉사가 말했어요.
재봉사는 염소를 마구간으로 데려가 단단히 묶었어요.
가려다 말고 몸을 다시 염소에게로 돌려 말했어요.
“그래, 얘야 이번엔 배부르지?”
하지만 이 망할 놈의 염소는 그(재봉사)라고 용서해주지 않았어요.
염소가 소리쳤어요.
“원 세상에, 뭔 수로 제가 배부를 수 있겠어요? 무덤 사이만 온통 뛰다왔는걸요. 먹을 게 하나도 없어 쫄쫄 굶어야 했다고요, 메에! 메에!”
그 말 같지도 않은 소리를 들은 재봉사는 깜작 놀라고 말았어요. 이 나쁨 짐승을 믿고 그동안 아무 죄 없는 세 아들을 내쫓았기 때문이죠.
“이런 배은망덕한 놈 같으니라고,”라며 그가 소리쳤어요. “내가 그렇게 귀엽게 여겼거늘, 감히 날 속여, 안 되겠다. 네게 표시를 해서 다신 정직한 재봉사들 눈에 띄지 않도록 해야겠다.”
그는 황급히 위층으로 뛰어올라가 자신의 면도기를 가져와 그 염소의 머리에 면도용 비누거품을 칠하고 면도를 해버렸어요. 그래서 염소의 머리가 손바닥처럼 반짝반짝해졌어요.
그리고 두들겨 패려고 보니 ‘긴자’(기다란 자)는 이놈에게 너무 좋을 거 같아, 말 채찍을 가져와 흠뻑 때리곤 맹렬한 속도로 내쫓아버렸어요. 
그리하여 이제 이 집엔 재봉사 혼자만 남게 되었어요.
그는 너무너무 슬펐어요.
아들들이 제발 돌아왔으면 하고 바랬지만, 어느 아들도 어디로 갔는지 소식이 전해지지 않네요.
사실 그의 첫째 아들은 ‘가구장이’(가구를 만드는 사람) 밑으로 들어가 실습생이 되었어요.
그는 열심히 그리고 부지런히 배운 결과 스승을 떠날 때가 되었어요.
그러자 스승님이 제자에게 작은 식탁, 그러니까 별 특별한 게 없이 식탁 하나를 선물로 주셨어요. 그냥 흔한 나무재질로 만든 거였어요. 
하지만 그건 굉장한 물건이었어요. 즉, 누구든 그걸 앞에 놓고 이렇게 말하면 되었죠.
“요술 식탁아, 상을 차려죵.”
그럼 그 작은 식탁에 즉시 깨끗하고 귀여운 천이 덮이고, 접시가 놓여지고, 나이프(칼)며 포크가 그 옆에 놓여 졌고, 삶은 고기들과 구운 고기들이 접시에 듬뿍듬뿍 딱딱 놓여지고, 큰 유리잔엔 붉은 포도주가 콸콸 채워지는 그야말로 요술 식탁이었던 거지요.
젊은 일꾼(재봉사의 첫째 아들)은 생각했어요.
“와, 이 요술 식탁만 있음 평생 먹고사는데는 문제 없겠다.”
그래서 기쁜 마음으로 여행을 떠났죠.
세상에, 여인숙이 좋든 나쁘든 이젠 그에게 전혀 문제가 안 되었어요. 아니 아니 여인숙이 그가 가는 길에 있든 없든 문제가 안 되었지요.
여인숙이 전혀 안 좋더라도, 아니 그냥 땅바닥 위라도, 숲에서라도, 목초지에서라도, 아님 상상가능 한 어디서든, 그는 그냥 자신의 등에서 그 요술 식탁을 풀어 앞에 놓고 이렇게 말하면 되었거든요.
“상 차려죵.”
그럼 산해진미가 그의 기대를 충족하고도 남을 정도로 짠하고 차려지는 거예요.
마침내 그(첫째 아들)의 머리에 아빠에게 돌아가도 될 거 같단 생각이 들었어요. 지금쯤이면 아빠의 화도 많이 누그러졌을 거고, 무엇보다 자신이 받은 이 요술 식탁을 보여드리면 아빠도 반기실 거 같았거든요.
그렇게 집으로 가는 도중, 저녁이 되어 그는 손님들로 가득한 어느 여인숙에 들어갔어요.
손님들은 그를 환영해주어고 서로 자기 자리에 앉아 같이 먹고 마시자며 초대해주었어요.
안 그러면 그가 먹을 게 하나도 없었거든요, 손님들이 다 먹는 바람에요.
“아닙니다.”라며 그 ‘가구장이’(첫째 아들. 가구를 만드는 사람)가 대답했어요. “당신들이 드실 음식도 얼마 되지 않는데 제가 빼어먹을 순 없지요. 그보단 제가 여러분들을 제 손님으로 초대하겠습니다.”
손님들이 컬컬 웃었어요. 자기 먹을 거도 없는데 농담하는 줄 알았거든요.
하지만 그가 방 한 복판에 나무 식탁을 놓고,
“요술 식탁아, 상을 차려죵.”라고 말하자,
그 즉시 음식이 가득 들어찬 거예요. 그것도 여인숙 주인마저도 생전 처음 보는 꿀맛 음식들이 가득했지요. 게다가 음식에서 모락모락 김이 나며 손님들의 콧구멍을 유쾌하게 자극하지 뭐예요.
“사양말고 마음껏 드십시오, 친구들.”라며 가구장이가 말했어요.
그 말만 기다리고 있던 손님들이 두 번 사양하지 않고 우르르 몰려와 자신들의 나이프(칼)를 뽑아들고선 마구 먹어대기 시작했어요.
게다가 더 놀라운 것은, 한 접시가 비면, 금세 그 자리에 똑같은 음식이 가득 생긴다는 거예요.
구석모퉁이에 서 있던 여인숙주인은 정말이지 까무러치기 일보직전이라 머릿속에 아무것도 생각이 나지 않지 뭐예요. 
그러다 생각했죠.
‘저거만 있음 부엌에 놓고 요긴하게 사용할 수 있겠는걸.’ 
가구장이와 그의 벗들은 밤늦도록 흥겹게 놀았어요.
그러다 결국 모두들 잠이 들었죠.
젊은 실습생(첫째 아들) 또한 자신의 요술 식탁을 벽에다 단단히 걸어 놓고서 잠에 들었지요. 
하지만 여인숙주인은 한시도 마음을 놓을 수 없었어요.
때마침 자신의 헛간엔 그 요술 식탁과 똑같이 생긴 낡은 식탁이 하나 더 있었어요.
정말이지 실습생의 요술식탁과 똑같아 보이는 그 낡은 식탁을 꺼낸 다음 여인숙주인이 살금살금 실습생의 방으로 들어와 두 식탁을 바꿔치기 해버렸어요.
다음날 가구장이(첫째 아들)가 숙박료를 지불하고 자신의 식탁을 들고 그게 가짜일 거란 생각은 전혀 안하고서 해맑게 길에 올랐어요.
정오(낮 12시)쯤 그는 아빠 집에 도착했어요. 
아들을 본 아빠가 무척이나 기뻐하셨어요.
“그래, 내 사랑하는 아들아, 그동안 무얼 배워왔더냐?”라며 아빠가 그에게 말했어요.
“아부지, 저는 이제 가구장이가 되었어요.”
“오, 그 참 좋은 직업이구나.”라며 나이 많은 남자가 대답했어요. “그래 실습기간을 마치고 보상으로 받아온 거라도 있더냐?”
“그럼요, 아부지, 정말 기똥찬 식탁 하나를 선물로 받은 걸요, 기똥차요.”
재봉사가 앞뒤좌우로 그것을 살펴보다 말했어요.
“뭐냐, 이거 그냥 멀쩡한 일반 식탁이지 않더냐, 절대 명품으론 보이지 않는데. 그냥 볼품없이 낡은 일반 식탁이잖니.”
“하지만 이건 스스로 상을 차리는 식탁이랍니다.”라고 아들이 대답했어요. “상을 앞에 놓고, ‘상을 차리라’ 말하면 각종 산해진미들이 듬뿍듬뿍 접시에 담겨요. 포도주도 나오고요. 아 기쁘라. 어서 친척들과 친구들을 초대하세요, 아부지. 오늘 한 번 배나 거나하게 먹으며 즐겨보자고요. 그들이 바랄 때까지 이 식탁이 음식을 내줄 테니까요.”
손님들이 모두 모이자, 그가 식탁을 방 한가운데 놓고서 말했어요.
“요술 식탁아, 상을 차려죵.”
하지만 요술 식탁엔 아무 일도 안 생겼어요.
그냥 사람의 말을 못 알아듣는 다른 일반 식탁과 별반 다를 게 없었지요.
그제야 불쌍한 실습생은 자신의 식탁이 바꿔치기 된 걸 깨닫게 되었답니다. 그나저나 사람들 앞에서 거짓말쟁이가 되어 눈총을 받으며 서 있는 창피함은 어쩌란 말인가요.
친척들은 그를 놀리며, 한 모금 마시지고 한 입 먹지도 못하고서 그냥 집으로 돌아가야 했어요.
아빠는 자신의 천 조각들을 다시 꺼내 양복을 계속 만들었고, 아들은 ‘공예기술자’ 밑으로 들어가 일을 시작했어요.
둘째 아들은 ‘방앗간 주인’에게가 실습생이 되었어요.
실습기간이 끝나자, 주인이 말했어요.
“그동안 성실히 일해 주었으니, 내 너에게 특별한 당나귀 한 마리를 주마. 다만 이 당나귀는 마차를 끌거나 물건을 나르는 그런 당나귀가 아니다.”
“아니 그런 당나귀를 어디다 쓰라고요?”라며 젊은 실습생이 말했어요.
“얘의 입에선 금화가 나온단다.”라며 방앗간 주인이 말했어요. “천 위에 얘를 서 있게 하고서 ‘수리 수리 마수리’(원문→브리클브릿. 브리클=약한. 브릿=정어리생선)라고 말하면, 이 착한 동물이 네 몫의 금화를 쏟아낼 게다.” 
“그 참 기똥찬 물건이군요.”라며 실습생이 말했다.
그는 주인에게 거듭 감사인사를 한 다음 세상 밖으로 여행을 떠났다. 
그는 이제 금화가 필요할 때면 그저 그냥 “수리 수리 마수리”라고 당나귀에게 말만 하면 되었다. 그럼 그 당나귀가 금화를 비 오듯 쏟아냈고 청년이 할 일이란 그냥 땅바닥에 떨어진 그 금화들을 줍기만 하면 되는 일이었다. 
그는 어디를 가든 최고급 최상품 명품을 사용했다. 왜냐면 지갑이 언제나 두둑했기 때문이었다. 
그렇게 세상을 한 동안 여행하던 그가 생각했다. 
“아부지께 한 번 찾아가볼까. 아부지도 이 황금 당나귀를 보시면 화를 누그러뜨리고 나를 반겨주시겠지.”
그러다 우연히 둘째도 그의 형이 요술 식탁을 바꿔치기 당했던 바로 그 여인숙에 드러게 되었어요.
그가 고삐(=줄)를 쥐고 당나귀를 데려오자, 주인이 그에게서 고삐를 건네받아 묶어두려했어요.
하지만 젊은 실습생은 말했어요.
“아 신경 쓰지 마십시오, 이 회색 말은 제가 직접 마구간에 메어두겠습니다. 왜냐면 어디다 메어 두었는지를 잘 봐 둬야하거든요.”
그래서 주인은 참 별난 사람이군, 하고 인상을 받았어요.
굳이 자기 말을 자기가 직접 돌보겠다고 하니까요.
그래도 별 신경은 쓰지 않았지요.
그런데 아니 이게 뭔가요 이 낯선 손님이 자기 호주머니 속에 손을 집어 넣더니 글쎄 금화 두 닢을 꺼내 거나하게 한 상 차려보라지 않겠어요.
그래서 주인의 두 눈이 휘둥그레지고 말았지요.
주인은 얼른 달려가 구할 수 있는 가장 맛난 음식을 사다 손님이 바란 대로 한상 차려드렸어요.
저녁식사가 끝난 후 그 손님(둘째 아들)이 “얼마냐?”고 물었어요.
주인은 두 배의 가격을 불렀지요. 그래도 될 거 같았거든요.
“금화 두 닢을 더 주셔야합니다요.”
둘째가 호주머니를 뒤져보니 금화는 그게 다였어요.
“잠시만요, 주인장 나리.”라며 그가 말했어요. “내 금방 찾아 드리리다.”
그러더니 그 젊은이가 식탁보를 가져가는 거예요.
이게 대체 무얼 하려는 건지 주인은 몰랐고, 궁금하기도 해, 몰래 젊은이의 뒤를 쫓아가봤어요.
그 손님이 마구간의 문을 단단히 잠갔기 때문에, 주인은 마구간 나무 벽을 서로 묶다 생긴 구멍을 통해 안을 엿보았어요. 
그 손님(둘째 아들)은 식탁보를 그 동물(당나귀) 밑에 펼치더니 소리쳤어요.
“수리 수리 마수리.”
그러자 즉시 그 짐승이 금화를 쏟아내기 시작했어요. 정말이지 땅바닥에 비가 내리듯 금화가 떨어졌어요.
“어, 원 세상에,”라며 주인이 말했어요. “금화가 참 억수같이 내리네! 절대 고장날 리 없는 지갑이구먼.”
손님이 지불하고 자러 들어갔어요.
하지만 밤이 되자 주인이 마구간으로 몰래 들어가 금화를 쏟아내는 그 당나귀를 다른 곳으로 끌고 가고, 대신 그 자리엔 다른 당나귀를 묶어놓았어요.
새벽 일찍 실습생이 자기 당나귀를 데리고 출발했어요.
그게 자신의 황금 당나귀라 철썩 같이 믿었답니다.
정오(낮 12시)에 그가 아빠 집에 도착했어요.
아빠는 아들을 다시 보자 기뻐하며 반겨주었어요.
“그래 너는 무엇이 되었더냐, 내 아들아?”라고 나이 드신 아빠가 물었어요.
“방앗간 일꾼이 되었어요.”
사랑하는 아빠가 대답했어요.
“여행에서 무얼 얻어가지고 왔더냐?”
“당나귀 딱 한 마리요.”
“당나귀는 여기도 많지 않더냐.”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “차라리 좋은 염소를 한 마리 얻어 오지 그랬구나.”
“네,”라며 아들이 대답했어요. “하지만 이 당나귀는 평범하지 않아요, 아부지. 황금 당나귀예요. 내가 ‘수리 수리 마수리’라고 외치면 이 황금 짐승이 입을 벌리고 금화를 마구 쏟아내는 걸요. 친척들이나 얼른 불러보세요, 제가 그들을 모두 부자로 만들어드릴테니까요.”
“그 참 듣던 중 반가운 소리다.”라며 재봉사(아빠)가 말했어요. “그렇게만 된다면야 나도 바느질의 고통에서 벗어날 수 있지 않겠니.”
아빠는 그러면서 밖으로 나가 친척들을 모두 불러오셨어요.
사람들이 한데 모이자마자, 방앗간 일꾼(둘째 아들)이 공간을 만들더니 식탁보를 펄럭펄럭 펼쳐 놓은 다음 당나귀를 그 식탁보 위에 올려다 놓았어요.
“자 그럼 잘들 보세요.”라며 그가 말한 다음 외쳤어요. “수리 수리 마수리.”
하지만 금화 한 닢도 떨어지지 않은 걸요.
그 당나귀도 이 세상의 다른 모든 당나귀들처럼 그런 기똥찬 기술이 없는 건 이제 너무도 분명했어요.
어안이 벙벙해 한 참을 넋 놓고 서 있던 불쌍한 방앗간 일꾼(둘째 아들)은 그제야 자기가 속은 걸 알아차렸고, 큰 기대를 품고 왔던 친척들은 왔던 그대로 가난한 채로 각자의 집으로 향했지요.
어쩌겠어요, 나이 많은 사나이(아빠)는 다시 자신의 바늘을 쥐고서 일에 전념해야 했고요, 젊은이(둘째 아들)는 다른 방앗간 주인 밑으로 들어가 일꾼이 되었답니다.
셋째 아들은 어느 ‘공예가’(원문→선반공. 선반 위에 금속을 올려놓고 돌리면서 깎거나 해 물건을 만드는 직업) 밑에 들어가 실습생 생활을 했어요.
그래서 그는 숙련된 공예가가 되었어요, 그건 막내가 가장 바라던 직업이었어요.
하지만 막내는 다른 두 형이 보내온 편지를 통해 형들의 운이 어떻게 뒤집어진 줄을 잘 알고 있었어요. 형들이 집에 도착하기 하루 전 밤에 들렀던 여인숙의 주인이 형들을 속여 값진 선물들을 쓱싹 한 거 말이에요.
공예가로써의 실습기간이 모두 끝이나 막내가 여행길에 오르기 전, 스승님께선 실습생활을 매우 잘 해낸 막내에게 ‘자루’(물건을 담는 자루. 포대기) 하나를 주시며 말했어요.
“이 안엔 몽둥이가 하나 들어 있단다.”
“자루라면 그 안에 물건들을 담을 수 있으니,”라며 막내가 말했어요. “요긴하게 쓸 테지만, 그 안에 왜 몽둥이를 넣으신 건지요? 그럼 자루만 무거워지잖습니까.”
“내 이제부터 네게 그 이유를 일러주마.”라며 스승님이 대답했어요. “누구든 너를 해하려고 하면 이렇게만 말하거라, ‘몽둥이아, 자루에서 나와라!’라고 말이다. 그럼 이 몽둥이가 사람들 속으로 튀어나와, 사람들이 1주일은 누워 있을 만큼 등짝을 후려갈기며 몽둥이 춤을 출 게다. 몽둥이는 네가 ‘몽둥이야, 자루로 들어가라!’라고 할 때까지 계속 몽둥이 찜질을 해댈 게다.” 
실습생은 거듭 감사인사를 드린 후, 그 자루를 등에 둘러매었어요.
누가 너무 가까이 다가와 자신을 위협하려들면 그는 이렇게 말했답니다.
“몽둥이아, 자루에서 나와라!”
그럼 그 즉시 몽둥이가 튀어 나와 상대방의 등짝을 두들겨 패 외투나 재킷(웃옷)을 먼지투성이로 만들어버렸지요.
그래서 상대방이 옷을 벗을 때까지 몽둥이찜질은 계속 되었는데 워낙에 빠른 몽둥이 질이라 누구도 미처 무엇에 얻어맞는지를 알아차리지 못했지요. 어느 순간에 다른 사람을 두들겨 패고 있던 몽둥이에 자신이 당하고 있었으니까요.
저녁 무렵 그 젊은이(막내)이도 형들이 당했던 바로 그 여인숙에 들리게 되었어요.
그는 앞에 놓인 식탁 위에 자신의 자루를 내려놓고서 지금까지 세상에서 본 진기한 것들을 죄다 말로 꺼내놓기 시작했어요.
“네,”라며 그(막내)가 말했어요. “내가 굳이 얕보는 건 아니지만… 스스로 상을 차리는 식탁이나, 황금 당나귀 이런 거야 금방 찾지… 하지만 내가 얻은 이 보물로 말할 거 같으면 비교 대상이 없지요. 이 자루에 담아 들고 다니는 이거 말이오.”
여인숙주인이 귀를 쫑긋 세우며 말했어요.
“그래 이 안에 대체 뭐가 들었단 말이오?”
그러면서 여인숙주인은 생각했어요. 
‘옳다구나, 좋은 일은 세 번 연달아 있다더니.’
취침시간이 되자, 그 손님(막내)은 자신의 자루를 베개로 삼고 긴 의자 위에 팔다리를 쭉 뻗으며 누었어요.
여인숙주인은 손님이 푹 잠들었다 생각하고 그에게로 다가가 아주 조용하고도 조심해가며 그 자루를 그의 머리에서 빼내고 다른 걸로 대신 했어요.
하지만 공예가(막내)는 한참을 이 순간만 기다린 걸요.
여인숙주인이 힘껏 자루를 열러하자마자 그(막내)가 소리쳤어요.
‘몽둥이아, 자루에서 나와라!’
그 즉시 사랑스런 몽둥이와 툭 튀어나오며 여인숙주인에게 달려들어 한바탕의 몽둥이찜질을 야단법석하게도 해주었답니다.
“아이고 제발 자비를 베풀어주십쇼.”라며 주인이 소리쳤어요.
주인이 더 크게 소리치면 칠수록 그의 등짝을 후려갈기는 몽둥이찜질의 강도는 더욱더 세져만 갔답니다.
결국 완전히 진이 빠진 주인이 땅바닥에 녹다운이 되어 쓰러졌어요.
그때 공예가(막내아들)가 말했어요.
“네 놈이 요술 식탁과 황금 당나귀를 돌려주지 않으면 몽둥이찜질이 새로 시작될 것이다.”
“아이고, 나 죽네.”라며 주인이 싹싹 빌며 말했어요. “모두 다 내 놓겠습니다. 이 저주받은 요정이나 얼른 자루에 다시 넣어주십시오.”
그러자 실습생(막내아들)이 말했어요.
“정의(몽둥이찜질) 대신 자비를 베푸마! 하지만 다신 이런 일이 없도록 하렷다!”
그래서 그가 소리쳤어요.
“몽둥이야, 자루로 들어가라!”
그제야 주인도 한 숨 쉴 수 있었어요.
다음날 아침 공예가(=선반공)는 ‘요술 식탁’과 ‘황금 당나귀’를 가지고 아빠 집으로 갔어요.
재봉사(아빠)는 아들은 다시 보자 더할 나위 없이 기뻐 “그동안 타지방에서 무얼 배워왔느냐?”고 물으셨어요.
“사랑하는 아빠,”라며 그가 말했어요. “저 이제 공예가에요.”
“그 참 기술적인 직업이구나.”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “그래 여행에선 무엇을 얻어가지고 돌아왔느냐?”
“소중한 거요, 아빠.”라며 아들이 대답했어요. “자루 속에 든 몽둥이에요.”
“뭐!”라며 아빠가 소리쳤어요. “몽둥이라고! 그게 뭐가 소중하단 거니, 정말! 여기 온 나무에 널리고 널린 게 나뭇가지인데.”
“하지만 이런 건 없어요, 아빠. 제가 만약 ‘몽둥이아, 자루에서 나와라!’라고 말을 하면 몽둥이가 튀어나와 저에게 해코지를 하려던 자를 녹다운 시켜요. 그럼 상대방은 땅바닥 위에 누워서 몽둥이가 춤을 그칠 때까지 기다릴 수밖에 없거든요. 봐요, 이 몽둥이 덕택에 형들이 잃어버렸던 ‘요술 식탁’이며 ‘황금 당나귀’를 도로 받아 온 걸요. 자 사람을 보내 형들을 다 불러오시고, 일가친척들을 모두 초대해주세요. 제가 그 분들에게 식사와 음료수를 대접해드리고, 그들의 호주머니에 금화를 듬뿍 담아드릴 테니까요.” 
나이 많은 재봉사로선 막내의 그 말이 썩 믿기진 않았지만 어쨌든 친척들을 모두 모이게 했어요.
그때 ‘공예가’(원문→선반공)가 방안에 식탁보를 펼치더니 식탁보 위에 황금 당나귀를 데려다놓고는 형에게 말했어요.
“자요, 사랑하는 형, 당나귀에게 말해보세요.”
그러자 방앗간 일꾼(둘째 아들)이 말했어요.
“수리 수리 마수리.”
그 즉시 금화들이 ‘천둥을 수반한 소나기’가 내리듯 식탁보 위에 쏟아지기 시작했어요.
모인 사람들이 전부 자기 호주머니를 가득 채우고 더는 더 가져갈 수 없을 때까지 당나귀는 쉬지 않고 금화를 쏟아냈답니다.
여러분도 ‘거기 있었음 한 몫 하는 건데!’하고 바라시는 얼굴들이 선하네요.(←원문에 괄호‘( )’ 안에 있는 문장임. 제가 임의로 쓴 거 아님^^)
다음으로 ‘공예가’(원문→선반공)는 ‘요술 식탁’을 가져다놓고 말했어요.
“자요, 사랑하는 형, 식탁에게 말해보세요.”
즉시 가구장이가 말을 했어요.
“요술 식탁아, 상을 차려죵.”
그러자마자 한 상 가득 상이 차려졌어요.
고기가 어찌나 맛있던지 입이 고급진 재봉사(아빠)조차도 단 한번도 맛보지 못한 음식이었어요.
그렇게 밤늦도록 온 일가친척들이 모여앉아 흥겹게 먹고 마시며 즐겼답니다.
재봉사는 바늘과 실 그리고 긴자(기다란 자)와 큰 다리미를 장롱 안에 넣고 잠겨버렸어요. 그리곤 세 아들과 함께 즐겁고 멋지게 살았답니다.
(모두 원문에 있는 글들임→) 그럼 이쯤에서 재봉사로 하여금 세 아들을 쫓아내게 했던 바로 그 염소를 어떻게 되었는지 궁금하시죠?
제가 막 얘기해드리려던 참이었거든요.
그 염소(여자)는 대머리가 된 머리가 창피해 여우 굴로 뛰어 들어가 꼭꼭 숨고 말았어요.
그날 집에 돌아온 여우는 어둠속에서 큼직하게 빛나는 두 눈과 마주하곤 깜짝 놀라 도망치고 말았어요.
곰(남자)이 여우(남자)를 만났어요.
여우의 얼굴이 완전히 멘붕인 것을 본 곰이 말했어요.
“얼씨구, 여우 형, 뭔 일이야, 얼굴표정이 왜 그러는데?”
“아이고,”라며 ‘북미인디언’(여우)가 대답했어요. “글세 어느 사나운 짐승 한 마리가 내 동굴에 들어와 나를 매섭게 째려보지 뭐니.”
“그런 거라면 내가 물리쳐주지.”라며 곰이 말했어요.
곰은 여우 형과 함께 동굴로 가 안을 들여다봤어요. 
하지만 정말 사나워 보이는 두 눈을 보자 곰도 여우와 마찬가지로 겁에 질리고 말았어요.
그게 사나운 짐승이 아니었음에도 곰은 걸음아 나 살려라 하며 도망치고 말았어요.
꿀벌(여자)이 곰과 마주쳤어요.
곰의 당황해하는 얼굴을 보자 꿀벌이 말했어요.
“곰 씨, 얼굴이 처량해서 못 봐주겠어요, 그 밝던 얼굴이 다 어디 간 거예요?”
“아이고 말 한 번 잘 했네, 그래.”라며 곰이 대답했어요. “북미인디언 네 집에 사나운 짐승이 눈을 부라리고 있지 뭐야. 쫓아내려다 도리어 우리가 도망친 거야.”
꿀벌이 말했어요.
“정말 딱도 하시지, 저야 뭐 당신네들이 거들떠도 안 볼만큼 약한 곤충이지만, 이번 경우는 왠지 제가 당신네들을 도울 수 있겠는데요.”
그녀(꿀벌)가 여우의 동굴로 날아 들어가 보니, 염소의 대머리에서 부드럽게 빛이나는 게 보여 맹렬히 달려들어 침을 따끔하게 한 방 놓아주고 다시 솟구쳐 올랐어요.
그러자 염소가 펄떡 뛰어나오며 “메에에, 메에에.”라며 마치 미친 동물 마냥 소리를 지르며 숲 속으로 줄행랑을 쳤어요.
그 시간 이후 바로 지금까지도 염소가 어디로 ‘튄’(=간) 건지는 아무도 모른답니다. 

(동화 끝)

동화 「요술 식탁, 황금 당나귀, 자루 속에 든 몽둥이」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「요술 식탁, 황금 당나귀, 자루 속에 든 몽둥이」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter36.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



37. 엄지둥이



옛날 옛적에 난로바닥에 앉아 불을 콕콕 찌르고 있는 한 가난한 농부가 한 명 살고 있었어요.
그와 약간 떨어진 거리엔 그의 아내가 앉아 있었지요.
그때 그가 말했어요.
“집에 얘가 없으니! 이거 원 너무 조용하군, 다른 집엔 애들이 시끄럽게도 놀고 살맛 나는 거 같더니만.”
“그래요, 여보.”라며 아내가 한숨을 푸욱 쉬며 대답했어요. “엄지손가락만큼 아주 자그마한 애라도 한 명 있음 적적치는 않을 테고, 우리가 진짜 사랑해줄 텐데.”  
그때부터 우연인지 여인이 시름시름 앓았어요.
7개월 후 아이 하나를 출산했답니다.
아가는 팔다리가 다 있는 완벽한 몸이었는데, 다만 한가지 흠이 정말로 엄지손가락만큼 만했다는 거예요.
그때 부부가 말했어요.
“우리 바람대로 되었네, 여보, 우리의 귀여운 아기예요.”
너무도 작은 몸집 때문에 부부는 아가를 ‘엄지둥이’라고 불렀답니다.
부모님이 음식이 모자라지 않게 공급해주었지만 어째된 게 아이는 더 자라지가 않았지요.
처음에 태어난 그대로의 키를 유지했어요.
그럼에도 불구하고 눈이 초롱초롱한 게 누가 봐도 현명하고 민첩하단 것을 알 수 있었죠. 왜냐면 모든 게 확인되거든요.
어느 날 부모님이 땔감을 베러 숲으로 가실 준비를 하고 계셨어요.
그때 아빠가 혼잣말로 말했어요.
“누가 마차를 가져오면 얼마나 좋을까!”
“아 아빠.”라며 엄지둥이가 소리쳤어요. “제가 그 마차 약속 시간에 숲으로 몰고 가 볼 게요, 금방 갈게요.”
남자가 웃으며 말했어요.
“네가 어떻게, 넌 말을 ‘고삐’(=줄)로 이끌기엔 너무도 자그마하지 않니?”
“그니깐 요, 아빠, 엄마보고 ‘마구’(말을 부리는 기구)나 채우라고 해봐, 그럼 내가 말의 귀에 앉아서 말보고 이리로 저리로 가라고 말해볼 테니까.”
“그럼.”라며 남자가 대답했어요. “어디 한 번 그렇게 해보자구나.” 
갈 시간이 되자, 엄마가 말에 마구를 채우고 엄지둥이를 말의 귀 안에 넣어두었어요. 그러자 작은 녀석이 소리쳤어요.
“이러, 이러!”(←말을 모는 소리)
그러자 마치 마부가 탄 마냥 마차가 잘 굴러가 숲을 오른쪽 편으로 해서 들어갔어요.
모퉁이를 돌아야할 때가 되자 작은 녀석이 소리쳤어요.
“이러.”
때마침 두 낯선 남자가 다가오고 있었어요.
“원 세상에!”라며 그 중 한 남자가 말했어요. “저게 뭐야? 마차도 달리고, 말을 모는 소리까지도 들리는데, 뭐야 이거 아무도 안탔잖아!”
“설마 그럴 리가,”라며 다른 남자가 말했어요. “우리 저 마차를 뒤쫓아가보자 어디서 멈추는지 보자고.”
하지만 마차는 곧장 숲으로 들어가 나무가 베어진 곳에서 정확하게 멈추었어요.
엄지둥이는 아빠를 보자 소리쳤어요.
“여기요, 아빠, 제가 마차를 몰고 왔어요. 저 좀 이제 꺼내주세용.”
아빠가 왼손으로 말을 붙들고서 오른손으로 말의 귀에서 자그마한 아들을 꺼내주었어요.
엄지둥이는 밀짚 위에서 아주 기분좋아하며 앉아 있었어요.
하지만 아까 그 낯선 남자들은 엄지둥이를 보고서 너무 놀라 어안이 벙벙해 뭔 말을 해야 할지 몰랐어요.
둘 중 한 명이 다른 사람을 한쪽으로 데리고 가더니 말했어요.
“들어봐, 저 꼬마 녀석이라면 큰돈을 벌 수 있을 게야, 큰 도시에 돈을 받고서 전시하면 되잖아. 우리 저 애를 사자.”
그들은 농부에게 가 말했어요.
“이 어린 애를 우리에게 파시오. 우리가 잘 대우해주겠소.”
“안 되오.”라며 아빠가 대답했어요. “얘는 눈에 넣어도 아프지 않은 내 아들이오. 세상 억만금을 준대도 얘를 팔 순 없소이다.”
하지만 그 제안을 들은 엄지둥이가 아빠 외쿠의 주름들을 잡고 기어 올라가 어깨 위에 발을 디디고 서며 아빠 귀에다 소곤소곤 거렸어요.
“아빠 저를 파세요, 제가 금방 되돌아올 테니까요.”
그래서 아빠는 상당히 큰돈을 받고서 엄지둥이를 넘겼어요.
“어디 앉아 있을래?”라며 남자들이 엄지둥이에게 말했어요.
“아저씨 모자 가장자리에 앉게 해주세용. 거기라면 앞뒤로 뛰어다니며 시골경치를 구경할 수 있고 굴러 떨어질 염려도 없으니까요.”
남자들이 그의 바람대로 해주었어요.
그리하여 엄지둥이는 아빠와 작별인사를 하였고, 남자들은 엄지둥이를 데리고 떠났어요.
그들은 땅거미가 질 때까지 걸었어요.
그때 ‘자그마한 친구’(엄지둥이)가 말했어요.
“저 좀 내려주세요, 쌀 거 같아요.”
남자가 모자를 벗어 그 자그마한 친구를 길가 옆 땅바닥 위에 내려놓아주었어요.
그러자 엄지둥이가 폴짝 뛰어 잔디 사이로 기어들어가더니 눈여겨보았던 생쥐 구멍 속으로 쏙 미끄러져 들어가 버렸어요.
“잘 가세요, 신사 분들, 이제 저를 여기 두고 가시기만 하면 되요.”라고 그가 두 남자에게 소리치며 놀렸어요.
그들은 그쪽으로 달려와 자신들의 지팡이들로 그 생쥐 구멍을 쿡쿡 찔러 보았지만 헛수고였어요.
그러면 그럴수록 엄지둥이는 더 깊이 들어갔거든요.
곧 사방이 아주 깜깜해졌기에, 두 남자는 분통을 터뜨리며 빈지갑을 쥐고서 집으로 돌아가야 했답니다.
그들이 간 것을 본 엄지둥이는 지하통로를 통해 빠져나왔어요.
“이거 참, 밤에 땅 위를 걷는 건 아주 위험한데.”라며 그가 말했어요. “잘못 걷다 목이나 다리가 쉽게 부러질 수 있잖아!”
다행스럽게도 ‘달팽이 껍데기’ 하나를 두드려보니 속이 비어있었어요.
“아 고마워라!”라며 그가 말했어요. “일단 오늘밤은 이 안에 들어가 있음 안전하겠다.” 그러면서 안으로 쏙 들어갔답니다. 
오래지 않아 그가 막 잠이 들려는데 두 사나이(앞의 두 남성과는 다른 사람들임)이 지나가는 소리가 들렸어요. 
그들 중 한 사나이가 말했어요.
“야 고민 좀 해 봐, 어떻게 하면 부자 목사님의 은과 금을 잘 훔칠 수 있을지를?”
“그거 내가 참 잘할 수 있는데.”라며 엄지둥이가 그들의 대화에 끼어들며 말했어요.
“그게 뭔데?”라며 도둑들 중 한 명이 깜짝 놀라며 말했어요. “누가 방금 말하지 않았어.”
그들이 여전히 귀를 기울이며 서 있는 걸 확인한 엄지둥이가 또 말했어요.
“저를 당신들과 함께 데려가세요, 제가 도와드릴게요.”
“하지만 네가 어디 있단 말인데?”
“땅바닥을 보세요, 목소리가 나오고 있는 곳이 있을 거예요.”라며 그가 대답했어요.
결국 그 도둑들이 거기 있던 그를 찾아 그를 들어 올리며 말했어요.
“너 같은 쪼그마한 개구쟁이가 어떻게 우릴 돕는다는 거지?”라며 그들이 말했어요.
“잘요.”라며 그가 말했어요. “제가 창살을 타고 목사님의 방 안으로 기어들어갈 거거든요, 그래서 아저씨들이 가지길 원하는 것들을 꺼내다 드릴게요.”
“옳거니.”라며 그들이 말했어요. “이거 눈에 선한데.”
그들이 목사님의 집에 도착하자, 엄지둥이는 방안으로 기어들어갔어요.
그는 기어들어가자마자 즉시 온 힘을 다해 큰 소리로 외쳤어요.
“여기 있는 모든 거요?”
도둑들이 깜짝 놀라 말했어요.
“얘 살살 좀 말하거라, 아무도 깨지 않도록!”
하지만 엄지둥이는 마치 그 말이 안 들렸다는 듯이 행동하며 또다시 큰 소리로 외쳐댔어요.
“뭘 원한다고요? 여기 있는 모두다요?”
바로 옆방에서 자고 있던 요리사가 이 소리를 듣고 침대에서 일어나 귀를 기울였어요.
하지만 도둑들은 간이 콩알 만해져 이미 벌써 상당한 거리를 도망간 뒤였지요.
하지만 마침내 그 도둑들도 다시 용기를 내고 생각했어요.
“이건 저 꼬마 심술쟁이가 우릴 놀리는 거다.”
그래서 그들이 다시 돌아와 그에게 소곤소곤 말을 걸었어요.
“자, 장난치지 말고, 중요한 것만 이래 빼내거라.”
그때 엄지둥이가 있는 힘을 다해 또다시 큰 소리로 외쳤어요.
“여기 있는 죄다 드릴 테니, 아저씨들 손을 이리로 넣어주세요.”
듣고 있던 하녀(아까 그 잠에서 깬 요리사)의 귀에 이런 말들이 너무도 생생하게 들리자 그녀는 침대에서 벌떡 일어나 문으로 돌진했어요.
그 소리에 도둑들이 겁을 먹고 사나운 야생 사냥꾼(짐승)이 자신들을 뒤쫓아오기라도 하는 마냥 줄행랑을 치고 말았어요.
그 결과 하녀가 들이 닫쳤을 땐 아무도 없었어요.
하녀가 촛불을 하나 밝혔어요.
그녀가 그 곳에 도착했을 때, 엄지둥이는 눈치재지 않게 곡물창고로 숨었답니다.
하녀는 구석구석 조사한 후에도 아무것도 나오지 않자 다시 자기 침대로 가 누웠어요. 
아무래도 눈 뜨고 귀 열고 자다 꿈을 꾸었나 보다 하고 말이죠.
엄지둥이가 건초(=풀)더미들 사이를 기어 올라가보니 누워 잘만한 공간이 나왔어요.
일단 거기서 낮까지 자고 부모님이 계신 집으로 돌아갈 생각이었죠.
하지만 그는 다른 걸 눈치챘어야했어요.
즉, 이 세상에는 고통과 고뇌가 늘 우리와 함께 한다는 것을요!
새벽이 밝을 무렵 침대에서 일어난 하녀가 젖소들에게 먹이를 줄 시간이 되었어요.
‘헛간’(물건을 넣어두는 곳)으로 온 그녀가 처음으로 한 일은, ‘건초’(베어서 말린 풀)를 한 움큼 거머쥔 거였어요. 
에구 에구 우리의 불쌍한 엄지둥이가 누워 자고 있던 바로 그 건초였지 뭐예요.
하지만 엄지둥이는 너무도 곤히 자고 있었기에 아무것도 인식하지 못했지요.
그가 눈을 떴을 땐 이미 젖소의 입 안이었거든요.
건초와 함께 엄지둥이까지 젖소가 먹은 거였지요.
“앗, 엄마야!”라며 그가 소리 질렀어요. “내가 어쩌다 방앗간에 들어오게 된 거지?”
하지만 곧 그는 거기가 어딘지 파악했어요.
그런 다음 이빨들 사이를 간신히 피한 결과 몸이 조각나진 않았지만, 어쩔 수 없이 건초(=풀)와 함께 ‘위’(소화기관) 속으로 미끄러져 내려가고 말았답니다. 
“이 작은 방(=소의 위)엔 창문도 없네.”라며 그가 말했어요. “햇빛 한 줄기 안 들어오고, 촛불을 가져올 수도 없고.”
그는 그 방들(소의 위는 4개임)이 즐겁지 않았어요. 더 나쁜 건 자꾸 문을 통해 건초(=풀)들이 들어온다는 것이죠, 즉 움직일 수 있는 공간이 점점 좁아지고 있었답니다.
결국 화가 난 그가 목청껏 소리를 질렀어요.
“사료 좀 그만 먹여, 사료 좀 그만 먹이라고요.”
때마침 젖소에게서 우유를 짜고 있던 하녀는 누군가의 말을 들은 거 같아 돌아봤지만 아무도 없었어요.
그런데 가만 보니 그 목소리는 자신이 어젯밤에 들었던 목소리와 동일한 소리이지 뭐예요. 
화들짝 놀라 그녀가 걸상(등받이가 없는 걸상)에서 미끄러져 와장창 우유를 쏟고 말았답니다.
그녀가 허겁지겁 주인에게 달려가 말했어요.
“원 세상에나, 목사님요, 소가 말을 함미다요!”
“자네 미쳤는감?”라며 목사님이 대답했어요.
하지만 목사님은 무슨 일이 벌어진 건지 확인하기 위해 직접 외양간으로 가보았지요.
목사님이 외양간 안에 한 발자국 들여놓자마자 엄지둥이가 다시 목청껏 소리를 질렀어요.
“사료 그만 좀 먹여요, 사료 그만 좀 먹이라고요.”
그 바람에 목사님도 화들짝 놀라고 말았어요, 그래서 사악한 영혼이 젖소에게 들어간 거라 여기고선 그 젖소를 죽이라고 지시했지요.
젖소가 죽었어요.
하지만 엄지둥이가 들어가 있던 그 위(소의 위)는 쓰레기 더미 위에다 내던져졌어요.
소의 위 4개에서 빠져나오는 건 정말이지 힘들었어요. 하지만 차례차례 나와 이제 한 발작만 더 가면 간신히 자신의 목을 바깥으로 뺄 수 있을 때에, 새로운 불행이 그만 그를 덮치고 말았어요.
즉 배고픈 늑대 한 마리가 거길 들렀다 게걸스럽게 위들을 몽땅 꿀꺽 하고 말았던 거예요.
엄지둥이는 용기를 잃지 않았어요.
“아마,”라며 그가 생각했어요. “늑대는 내 말을 알아듣겠지.”
그래서 그가 늑대의 위에서 늑대를 불렀어요.
“착한 늑대야, 네가 배부르게 먹을 수 있을 만한 곳을 내가 아는데 말이야.”
“거기가 어딘데?”라며 늑대가 말했어요. 
“이렇게 저렇게 생긴 집이야. 부엌의 싱크대를 통해 기어들어갈 수 있단다. 그럼 넌 케이크와 베이컨(삼겹살)과 소시지들을 내가 마음껏 먹을 수 있을 만큼 발결할 수 있을 거야.”
엄지둥이가 설명한 곳은 정확하게 아빠의 집이었어요.
그리고 늑대에겐 이 설명을 두 번 할 필요도 없었답니다. 
늑대는 밤에 싱크대를 통해 집안으로 몰래 들어간 다음 식료품실에서 마음껏 먹었어요.
배부르게 먹은 늑대가 다시 밖으로 빠져나가려고 보니 몸이 너무 뚱뚱해져 있어 똑같은 길로는 빠져나갈 수가 없지 뭐예요.
이 상황을 예상하고 있던 엄지둥이가 늑대의 몸 안에서 난폭한 소리를 내기 시작했어요.
그는 목청껏 비명을 지르며 날뛰었어요.
“너 임마 조용히 안 해.”라며 늑대가 말했어요. “이러다 사람들 다 깨겠잖아!”
“흥, 뭐,”라며 작은 친구가 대답했어요. “너만 배터지게 먹었잖아, 이제 내가 기분 좀 내보겠다는데 뭐.”
그러면서 한 번 더 있는 힘껏 비명을 지르기 시작했지요.
마침내 그의 아빠와 엄마가 그 소리를 듣고 잠에서 깨 그 방으로 달려가 문틈을 통해 안을 들여다보았어요.
안에 늑대 한 마리가 있는 게 보였어요. 그래서 일단 도망친 다음 남편은 도끼를 쥐고 아내는 큰 낫을 들고서 다시 왔어요.
“뒤로 물러나 있다가.”라며 그들이 방에 들어왔을 때 남자가 말했어요. “내가 저 놈에게 한 방 먹였는데도, 저 놈이 죽지 않으면, 그땐 당신이 저 놈을 마저 죽여 몸을 베 버려.”
부모님의 목소리들을 들은 엄지둥이가 소리쳤어요.
“사랑하는 아빠, 저 여기 있어요. 늑대의 몸 안에 들어있다고요.”
그 소리에 아빠가 크게 기뻐하며 말했어요.
“아 고마워라! 우리 애가 찾아왔나봐, 여보.”
그러면서 아빠는 아내보고 큰 낮을 일단 치우라 말했어요. 자칫 늑대를 베려다 엄지둥이까지 다칠 수가 있었기 때문이지요.
그 후 아빠가 팔을 들어 올려 늑대의 머리를 힘껏 내리쳐 죽였어요.
그런 다음 부모님은 칼과 가위를 가져와 늑대의 몸을 째고 어린 아들을 끄집어냈답니다. 
“아,”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “우리가 너 때문에 얼마나 걱정을 했는지 모른단다.”
“네, 아빠, 저도 세상을 많이 돌아다녔어요. 이렇게 새 공기를 다시 마실 수 있다니, 정말 다행이에요!”
“그래, 어디를 갔었니?”
“아, 아빠, 생쥐의 구멍에도 들어가 보고요, 젖소의 위에도 들어가 보고요, 다음으로 늑대의 위에도 들어가 본 걸요, 이제 아빠 엄마와 함께 집에 머물려고요.” 
“그래 우리도 너를 다신 팔지 않으마. 억만금을 준데도 말이다.”라며 그의 부모님이 말했어요.
부모님은 사랑하는 엄지둥이를 끌어안으며 키스를 해주었어요.
그런 다음 부모님은 엄지둥이에게 먹을 것과 마실 것을 주고, 새 옷도 몇 벌 다시 만들어주었답니다. 왜냐면 거친 여행 탓에 엄지둥이의 옷이 엉망이 되었거든요.

(동화 끝)

동화 「엄지둥이」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「엄지둥이」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter37.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



38. 여우 부인의 결혼식



첫 번째 이야기  (←원문에 있는 글자임)

옛날 옛적에 꼬리 아홉 달린 늙은 여우(남자)가 한 마리 살고 있었어요.
아, 근데, 아내가 아무래도 수상(바람을 피움)쩍은 거예요.
그래서 한 번 시험을 해보려고 마음먹었어요. 
그는 긴 의자 아래에 팔다리를 쭉 뻗고 나자빠져 까딱도 하지 않았어요. 마치 죽은 마냥 행동했죠.
그러자 여우 부인은 자기 방으로 들어가 문을 잠가버렸어요.
그녀의 하녀인 고양이 ‘양’(아가씨)이 불가에 앉아 요리를 했어요.
늙은 여우(남자)의 죽음은 삽시간에 소문이 쫙 났어요. 그래서 구혼자(결혼을 청하는 동물)들이 하나둘씩 모습을 드러냈어요.
누군가가 문 앞에 서 있는 게 들리더니 이내 노크 소리가 “똑똑”하고 들렸어요.
하녀가 나가보니 그건 젊은 여우였어요.
그가 말했어요.
“뭐하시나요, 고양이 양? 자나요, 아님 깨어나셨나요?”
그녀(고양이)가 대답했어요.
“자려던 건 아니니 깬 건 맞네요. 제가 막 뭘 만들려던 중인지 아세요? 버터를 넣은 맥주를 따뜻하게 끊일 참이었거든요. 안으로 들어오셔서 맛 좀 보실래요?”
“아뇨, 감사합니다, 아가씨.”라며 그 여우가 말했어요. “그래 여우 부인께선 지금 무얼 하고 계신가요?”
하녀가 대답했어요.
“그녀는 하루 종일 혼자 앉아 계세요. 끙끙 앓고 계신답니다. 예쁜 눈이 빨개질 정도로 울고 계세요. 늙은 여우 씨가 돌아가셨거든요.”
“그렇담, 그녀에게 말을 전해주십시오, 아가씨, 여기 젊은 여우 한 마리가 그녀에게 구혼하기 위해 와 있다고요.”
“잘 알겠습니다, 선생님.”
고양이가 계단을 또각또각 밟고 올라가 문을 똑똑똑 노크했어요.
“여우 주인마님, 안에 계신가요?”
“오 그래, 고양이야.”라며 그녀가 큰소리로 말했어요. 
“구혼자 한 분이 지금 문 밖에 와 계세요.”
“어떻게 생겼는지 말해줄래, 얘야?”
“…”
“그래 저번 여우 주인님처럼 아름다운 아홉 개의 꼬리가 있던?”
“오, 아뇨,”라며 고양이가 대답했어요. “하나뿐이던걸요.”
“그렇담 일 없다 전해라.”
고양이가 아래층으로 내려와 구혼자를 보내버렸어요.
곧이어 또다른 노크소리가 들리고, 또 다른 여우가 여우 부인에게 청혼을 하기 위해 문에 서 있었어요.
그는 꼬리가 두 개였어요. 하지만 뭐 꼬리 두 개는 하나와 동급 아닌가요, 아홉 개에 비하면요.
이런 식으로 계속 되었어요.
차례차례 꼬리가 하나씩 더 달린 분들이 오셨지요. 
하지만 그들 모두 빈손으로 돌아가야 했답니다.
그러다 마침내 돌아가신 여우 씨처럼 꼬리가 아홉인 동물이 나타나셨어요.
그 얘기를 전해들은 과부(여우 부인)이 기쁘하며 고양이에게 말했어요.
“문과 창문을 죄다 활짝 열고, 늙은 여우 영감의 시신일랑은 밖에 내다버려라.”
결혼식이 막 거행되려던 찰나에, 죽은 줄 알았던 여우 씨가 긴 의자(벤치) 아래서 일어나더니, 모든 구경꾼들(결혼 참석자들)을 몽둥이로 치고는 동물들과 여우 부인을 집 밖으로 내쫓아버렸답니다.


두 번째 이야기

이제 여우 씨가 나이 들어 정말로 죽자, 늑대 한 마리가 청혼을 하러 와 문을 똑똑 노크했어요.
여우 부인을 시중들고 있던 고양이 양이 문을 열어주었지요.
늑대가 그녀를 반가워하며 말했어요.
“안녕하세요, 아리따운 고양이 양, 혼자 앉아 계셨나요? 요리를 하고 계셨던 모양이군요?”
고양이가 대답했어요.
“우유에 빵을 쪼개 넣어 달달하게 하고 있었어요. 들어오셔서 드셔보실래요?”
“아뇨, 감사합니다, 고양이 양.”라며 그 늑대가 대답했어요. “그래 여우 부인께선 집에 계신지요?”
고양이가 말했어요.
“그녀는 2층 자기 방에 앉아 자신의 슬픈 운명을 몹시 슬퍼하고 계시답니다. 
늙은 여우 씨가 더는 안 계시니 옆구리가 쑤실 만도 하시지요.” 
늑대가 대답했어요.
“지금 남편을 찾으시는 거라면, 아래로 좀 내려와 보시라 전해주시겠습니까?”
고양이가 서둘러 계단을 올라갔다.
방문에 다다를 때까지 고양이 아가씨의 꼬리가 이리 저리 살랑살랑 날리었다. 
문에 도착한 그녀가 금반지 다섯 개를 낀 손으로 똑똑 노크를 했다. 
“안에 계신가요, 착한, 여우 마님? 지금 남편이 필요하신 거라면 잠시만 아래로 내려와 보실래요? 그가 그리 전해달래요?”
여우 부인이 물었어요.
“그 신사분이 빨간 스타킹(긴 양말)을 신었더냐? 그리고 입은 툭 튀어나오셨더냐?”
“아뇨.”라며 고양이가 대답했어요. 
“그럼 일 없다 전해라.” 
늑대가 가고나자, 멍멍이 씨도 왔고, 수사슴 씨도 왔고, 산토끼 씨도 왔고, 곰 씨도 왔고, 사자 씨 등등, 숲에 사는 온갖 들짐승들이 차례차례 다 다녀갔어요.
하지만 그들은, 늙은 여우 씨가 지니고 있던 장점들 중 한 가지씩은 꼭 부족했어요.
고양이는 계속해서 구혼자들을 그냥 돌려보내야했어요.
그러던 어느 날 마침내 젊은 여우가 도착했을 때, 여우 부인이 말했어요.
“저 신사 분은 빨간 스타킹(긴 양말)을 신으셨고, 입도 약간 툭 튀어나오셨다 그치?”
“네,”라며 고양이가 말했어요. “그래요.”
“그렇담 그 분을 이리로 들이거라.”라고 여우 부인이 말했어요.
곧 여우 부인은 하인들에게 결혼 잔치를 준비하라 지시를 내리셨어요. 
“방을 정성껏 쓸 거라. 창문을 열어젖히고. 내 오랜 님(죽은 여우 씨)은 떠나보내자! 그래 수년간 오동 통통 살찐 생쥐를 가져와, 마누라 생각은 않고, 혼자서만 쳐 드셨겠다.”
그런 다음 여우 부인과 젊은 여우 씨의 결혼식은 성대하게 치러졌어요.
모두들 축하하며 즐겁게 춤을 추었지요. 
만약에 그들을 그만두게 하지 않았음 아마 지금까지도 춤을 추고 있었을 거예요.(그만큼 결혼식이 기뻤다는 뜻이겠죠. ㅋㅋ)

(동화 끝)

동화 「여우 부인의 결혼식」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「여우 부인의 결혼식」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter38.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



39. 꼬마 요정들



첫 번째 이야기  (←원문에 있는 글자임)


자신의 잘못도 아닌데 가난해져만 가서 결국은 구두 한 결례만 만들 가죽만 남은 ‘제화공’(구두 만드는 사람)이 한 명 살고 있었어요.
그래서 저녁에 그가 내일 아침 일어나 만들기 시작하려고 가죽을 잘라놓았지요.
그리곤 편안한 마음으로 침대에 누워 잠이 들었어요.
물론 하느님께 기도드리는 건 잊지 않았답니다.
그런 다음 쿨쿨 잠이 들었지요.
아침에 일어나 기도를 드린 후 작업을 시작하려고 자리에 앉으려는데 어머나, 구두 두 결례가 테이블 위에 완성된 채로 놓여 있는 게 아니겠어요.
그는 깜짝 놀라 할 말을 잊고 말았답니다.
그가 구두를 집어 들어 찬찬히 살펴보니 그건 정말이지 잘 만들어진 구두였고, 서툰 바느질 자국도 하나도 없지 뭐예요. 정말이지 명품 제작자가 만든 걸작 같았어요.
곧이어, 손님 한 분이 들어오시더니, 그 구두를 보시곤 무척 마음에 들어 하시며, 원래 가격보다 더 지불하고 들고 가셨어요.
그 돈으로 제화공(구두를 만드는 사람)은 이번엔 구두 두 결례를 만들 수 있는 가죽을 구입할 수가 있었지요.
그는 밤에 가죽을 잘라놓고 다음날 아침 산뜻한 마음으로 다시 작업을 시작하려고 했지만, 웬걸요, 그는 전혀 그럴 필요가 없었어요. 
왜긴요 자리에서 일어나보면 항상 구두가 완성되어 있었거든요.
그리고 손님도 바로 바로 오셔서 구입해가셨고요.
그래서 이번엔 구두 네 결례를 만들 수 있는 가죽을 살 수 있을 정도의 돈을 모으게 되었어요.
다음날 아침도 역시 “짠!”하고 구두 네 결례가 완성되어져 있었어요.
그런 일이 연달아 계속 이어졌어요.
그가 저녁에 가죽을 잘라놓으면 아침에 구두가 완성되어 있었죠. 
그리하여 그는 곧 정직한 수단을 통해 다시 자립할 수 있었고 마침내 부자가 되었답니다.
이제 내일이면 크리스마스였어요.
크리스마스이브 날 그 남성은 가죽을 잘라놓고 자기 전 아내에게 말했어요.
“여보, 우리 오늘밤은 자지 말고 누가 우리를 도와주시는 건지 볼까요?”
여인도 찬성했어요.
촛불 하나를 켜고 그들은 방구석에 걸려있던 커튼 뒤에 몸을 숨기고 무슨 일이 일어나나 지켜보았더랍니다.
자정(밤12시)이 되자 발가벗은 깜찍한 두 꼬마 요정들이 들어오더니 제화공(구두를 만드는 사람)의 책상 앞에 앉아 쿵짝 쿵짝 가죽을 자르고 바느질을 시작하고 꿰매고 솜씨 좋게 망치질을 하고 뚝딱 뚝딱 고사리 같은(작은) 손가락들로 솜씨 좋게 일을 진행하는 게 아니겠어요.
이 광경에 제화공(구두를 만드는 사람)은 정말이지 눈이 휘둥그레지고 말았답니다.
두 꼬마 요정은 일을 다 마칠 때까지 쉬지 않고 일했어요. 그런 다음 다 완성된 구두를 테이블 위에 올려놓고 후다닥 도망쳐버렸어요.
다음날 아침 여인이 말했어요.
“여보, 그 꼬마 요정들이 우릴 부자로 만들어준 장본인인가 봐요, 그러니 고마움의 표시를 우리 쪽에서도 해줍시다. 그 애들이 뛸 때 보니 아무것도 안 입었디다, 고것들이 얼마나 추울까. 내가 당신 주려고 만들다 만 게 있는 게 그걸로 급히 꼬마용 셔츠와 외투 그리고 속옷과 바지를 만들어볼게요, 스타킹(긴 양말)도 둘 짜 볼게요. 그러니 당신도 그 애들이 신을 꼬마용 구두 두 결례를 만들어주세요.”
남자가 말했어요.
“그 듣던 중 반가운 소리요, 여보.”
하룻밤 사이 그들 부부는 모든 걸 준비해, 두 꼬마 요정들에게 줄 선물들을 다소곳이 테이블 위에 올려두었어요. 당근 이번엔 크리스마스니까 자른 가죽은 올려놓지 않았지요.
그런 다음 그들 부부는 몸을 숨기고서 그 꼬마 요정들이 어찌하나 지켜보기로 했어요.
자정(밤12시)이 되자 꼬마 요정들이 안으로 뛰어 들어오더니 즉시 작업을 시작하려고 했어요.
그런데 어머나 잘라 놓은 가죽은 안 보이고 꼬마들 용의 예쁘장한 옷들만 보이지 뭐예요.
꼬마 요정들도 처음엔 이게 뭔 상황인지 멘붕이었나 봐요 그러더니 자신들의 선물인 걸 알아차리곤 엄청 기뻐하지 뭐예요.
요정들이 엄청난 속도로 옷들을 입어보기 시작했어요, 예쁘장한 요정들이 예쁘장한 옷들을 입으며 예쁘장한 노래를 부르네요.
“우리 이제 ‘얼짱’(원문→소년)인 거야, 얼짱 구두 수선공이 된 거네?”
그런 다음 두 꼬마 요정들은 춤을 추고 의자와 긴 의자(벤치)들 위를 폴짝폴짝 넘어다녔어요.
마침내 그들이 춤을 추며 문밖으로 나갔답니다.
그때 이후론 꼬마 요정님들은 다시 오지 않았어요.
하지만 제화공(구두 만드는 사람)은 남은 생을 참말로 행복하게 살았어요, 사업이 날로 더 번창해갔거든요.




두 번째 이야기  (←원문에 있는 글자임)


옛날에 가난한 하녀가 한 명 살고 있었어요.
그녀는 근면하고 깔끔하게 집을 매일 빗자루로 쓸어 문 앞 쓰레기 더미들 위에 비었어요.
그러던 하루는 쓰레기를 비우고 돌아가려는데 보니, 쓰레기 더미 위에 편지 한 통이 꽂혀 있는 거 아니겠어요.
그래셔 글을 읽을 수 없던 그녀가 자신의 빗자루를 한쪽에 놓아두고 그 편지를 집어 주인님과 주인마님에게 가져갔지요.
그 분들이 말하길, 그건 꼬마 요정들에게서 온 초대장이란 거예요. 하녀가 꼭 참석해서 요정 아기의 세례식 때 (하녀가) 아기를 팔로 안아 달라는 요청이었어요.
하녀는 이게 대체 뭔 일인가 싶었지만, 결국 주인 부부가 이런 종류의 초대는 거절하는 게 아니라시며 많이 설득하시는 바람에 가시로 했어요.
그러자 세 꼬마 요정들이 오더니 그녀를 데리고 ‘움푹 꺼진 산’으로 갔어요. 거긴 꼬마 요정들이 사는 곳이었답니다.
그곳의 모든 것은 자그마하고 말로 다 표현 못할 정도로 정교하고 아름다웠어요.
아기 엄마는 진주가 박힌 새까맣고 단단한 침대에 누워 있었는데, 침대 이불은 금실로 수가 놓여 있었어요. 아기 침대(요람)는 상아(코끼리 엄미)로 만든 거였고, 아기 목욕통은 금으로 만들어져 있었어요.
아기의 세례식 때, 그 소녀(하녀)는 대모(여성 후견인)로서 서 있었어요.
세례식을 마치고 이제 그만 집에 돌아가려는데, 꼬마 요정들이 자기들과 3일만 더 머물다 가달라고 급히 부탁하지 뭐예요.
그래서 그녀는 머물기로 했어요. 웃고 즐기며 그 시간을 보냈죠.
꼬마 요정들이 그녀를 더없이 행복하게 해주려고 최선을 다했거든요.
마침내 그녀가 집으로 떠날 때가 되었어요.
그러자 꼬마 요정들은 그녀의 호주머니란 호주머니엔 죄다 돈으로 가득 채워준 다음, 그녀를 데리고 다시 산 밖으로 나왔어요.
집에 돌아온 그녀가 자신의 일(청소)를 시작하려고 빗자루를 집어 들었어요. 빗자루가 여전히 구석에 서 있었거든요.
그녀는 손에 빗자루를 쥐고 쓸기 시작했어요.
그땐 몇몇 낯선 사람들이 문밖으로 나오더니 그녀에게 “누구신데 지금 여기서 이러고 계시는지?”를 물었어요.
즉, 그녀가 꼬마 요정들과 산에서 보낸 3일이 그녀가 생각한 3일이 아니라, 인간의 시간으로 ‘장장’(상당히 긴) 7년이었던 거예요.
그 사이 전 주인 부부는 이미 죽고 안계셨답니다.



세 번째 이야기  (←원문에 있는 글자임)


어떤 엄마가 아가를 요람(아기침대)에 재우는데 꼬마 요정들이 나타나선 아가를 데리고 가 버리는 일이 발생했어요.
대신 꼬마 요정들은 요람에 머리가 커고 ‘야광’(밤에 빛을 냄) 눈동자를 한 ‘바꿔치기 아이’를 두고 갔어요.
그 ‘바꿔치기 아이’는 먹고 마시는 거 외엔 전혀 관심이 없어 보였어요.
이 문제를 상의하기 위해 엄마가 이웃집 여자에게 가 조언을 구했어요.
이웃집 여자가 그녀에게 말했어요.
“바꿔치기 아이를 부엌으로 데려가 난로 앞에 내려놓은 다음, 난로에 불을 붙이고, 두 개의 달걀 껍데기 속에 물을 약간 담아 끊여 봐, 이게 ‘바꿔치기 아이’를 웃게 하는 데는 만병통치약이니까. 만약 그 ‘바꿔치기 아이’가 웃으면 모든 게 원상으로 되돌려질 거야.”
그 여인이 이웃집 여자의 말대로 모두 실행했어요.
그녀가 물을 담은 달걀 껍데기를 불가위에 올려놓자, 그 개구쟁이(바꿔치기 아이)가 말했어요.
“내가 실은 서쪽 산악지대만큼이나 나이가 많지만, 내 생전 달걀 껍데기 속에 뭘 넣고 끓이는 건 또 처음 보내!”
그가 웃기 시작했어요.
그가 웃는 동안, 한 무리의 꼬마 요정들이 원래의 아기를 데리고 갑자기 나타나 불가에 그 아기를 내려놓은 후 ‘바꿔치기 아기’를 데리고 가버렸답니다.

(동화 끝)

동화 「꼬마 요정들」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「꼬마 요정들」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter39.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



40. 도둑 신랑


(앞뒤설명 : 원문엔 ‘강○ 신랑’이라고 되어 있음. ‘저 사람이 강○짓을 한다.’라고 말할 때의 단어요. 신부가 기지를 발휘해 결혼식 날 당일 진짜 나쁜 사람에게서 벗어났다는 얘기임. 강○라는 단어를 제 글에 사용하기 싫어 ‘도둑’이라는 단어를 대신 사용하였습니다.)


(본문시작)

옛날 옛적에 방앗간 주인이 한 명 살고 있었어요.
그에겐 아름다운 딸이 하나 있었지요.
딸이 자라자, 방앗간 주인은 이제 딸도 때도 되었으니 결혼했음 하고 바랬답니다.
그는 생각했어요.
“괜찮은 구혼자가 찾아와 달라고 하면, 결혼시켜줘야지.”
정말 오래지 않아 한(=1) 구혼자가 찾아왔는데, 정말 부자 같아 보이는 남자였어요.
방앗간 주인의 눈엔 흠 잡을 구석이 없었지요. 그래서 자신의 딸을 주겠다 약속했어요.
하지만 처녀는, 신부가 신랑을 좋아하는 만큼이나 정반대로 그 남성이 좋아지지 않고 뭐랄까 도무지 신뢰를 할 수 없는 남자 같이 보였어요.  
게다가 그를 보거나, 또는 그를 떠올려볼 때면 몰래 소름이 느껴졌어요.
한번은 그가 그녀에게 말했어요.
“당신은 내 약혼자요, 그런데 아직 한 번도 내 집에 와 보지 않았다는 게 말이 되오.”
처녀가 대답했어요.
“어디서 사시는지 몰라서요.”
그러자 신랑이 말했어요.
“내 집은 깊은 숲 속 어디에 있소.”
그녀는 미안하다 말하고 거기 그런 길이 있는지 몰랐다 말했어요.
신랑이 말했어요.
“다음 주 일요일 꼭 들리시구려. 내 손님들도 벌써 불렀으니. 당신이 숲에서 길을 찾을 수 있게 내가 재를 흩뿌려놓겠소.” 
일요일이 되자, 처녀는 길을 떠났어요.
그래도 속으론 몹시 불편했어요. 정확한 이유는 모르겠지만요, 그래도 혹시 모르니 두(=2) 호주머니 속에 완두콩과 ‘렌즈콩’(렌즈 모양의 콩. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/cPPolt )을 가득 넣고서 숲에 들어가면 가는 길을 표시 해둘 작정이었지요. 
숲의 입구에 가니 재가 흩뿌려져 있었어요. 그 재들을 그녀는 따라갔어요. 그래도 걸음을 옮길 때마다 땅바닥에 완두콩을 두 개씩 던져놓았어요.
온종일 걸으니 숲 한 가운데가 나왔어요.
거기가 숲에서 가장 어두운 지점이었어요.
외딴 집 한 채만 있더군요.
왠지 좋아지지 않는 집이었어요. 무척 어둡고 재수 없어 보이는 집이었지요.
그녀는 안으로 들어가 보았어요. 하지만 안엔 아무도 없었어요. 정말이지 쥐 죽은 듯이 조용한 곳이었어요. 
불쑥 어떤 목소리가 외쳤어요.
“돌아가, 돌아가, 이 젊은 처녀야, 네가 들어온 여긴 살인자들의 집이야.”
처녀가 위를 올려다보니 벽에 걸린 새장 속에 매달린 새가 내는 소리였어요.
그 새가 또다시 외쳐댔어요.
“돌아가, 돌아가, 이 젊은 처녀야, 네가 들어온 여긴 살인자들의 집이야.”
그래서 어린 처녀가 이 방 저 방 더 돌아다녀보았어요. 그러다 온 집을 다 돌아보았어요.
하지만 모두 텅텅 비어 있었고, 사람의 그림자는 하나도 보이지 않았어요.
마침내 그녀가 지하실로 가보니 거기 지극히 나이 많은 노파 한 명이 연신(계속) 고개를 흔드시며 앉아 계셨어요.
“제게 말씀해주시면 안 되나요,”라며 처녀가 말했어요. “여기가 제 신랑이 사는 덴지요?” 
“에구, 가엾은 것,”라며 그 노파가 대꾸했어요. “여기가 어디라고 들어온 게냐? 넌 지금 살인자들의 소굴에 들어온 게다. 너는 네가 곧 결혼할 거라 여기겠지만, 그들은 아니다. 너와 결혼할 것처럼 꾸미고 결혼식 날 죽이려던 게다. 봐라, 저기 커다란 솥 안에 뭐가 들어가기에 이토록 팔팔 끊이고 있겠니. 그들이 너를 발견하면 무자비하게 토막 내 요리해 먹으려 들게다. 왜냐면 그들은 인간의 살을 먹는 자들이거든. 만약 내가 너를 불쌍히 여겨 구해주기로 마음먹지 않았다면 넌 죽은 목숨이었을 게다.”
그 후 즉시 노파가 큰 통 뒤에 처녀를 데려가 숨겨주었어요.
“쥐 죽은 듯 가만 있거라.”라며 노파가 말했어요. “소리도 내지 말고, 움직이지도 말고, 그렇지 않음 모두가 너를 해치울 게다. 밤에 도둑들이 잠이 들면 우리 그때 탈출하자구나. 나도 오랫동안 기회만 봐왔다.”
이러자마자 무자비한 패거리들이 집에 들이 닫쳤어요.
그들은 또 다른 젊은 아가씨를 질질 끌고 왔어요.
그들은 술에 취해 있었고, 아가씨의 비명과 애원소리엔 눈 하나 꿈쩍하지 않았어요.
그들이 그녀에게 세 잔 가득 포도주를 먹였어요. 백포도주 한 잔, 붉은 포도주 한 잔, 그리고 노란 포도주 한 잔까지.
이걸 다 마신 그녀의 심장이 두 동강이 나며 터져버렸어요.
그 순간 즉시 그들이 그녀의 고운 옷을 찢으며 그녀를 식탁 위에 올려놓고 그녀의 아름다운 몸을 토막 내 소금을 흩뿌렸어요.
이 비참한 광경에 불쌍한 신부는 통 뒤에서 와들와들 떨어야했어요.
왜냐면 강○들이 그녀에게 하려던 짓거리가 바로 이것이었거든요.
그들 중 한 명이 보니 죽은 아가씨의 새끼손가락에 금반지 하나가 껴 있었어요.
그런데 그 반지가 잘 나오지 않았어요.
그래서 그 도둑이 도끼를 집어 들더니 싹둑 손가락을 잘라 버렸어요.
그 바람에 그게 공중으로 솟구쳐 올라 큰 통 너머까지 날아와 신부의 가슴 속에 쏙 들어가 버리고 말았어요.
도둑이 촛불 하나를 집어 들곤 찾았지만 발견하지 못했어요.
그때 다른 도둑이 말했어요.
“큰 통 뒤에 봐봐?”
하지만 노파가 소리쳤어요.
“이리와 어서 먹기나들 해. 그건 아침에 찾아도 되잖아. 손가락이 달아나기라도 하겠어.”
도둑들이 말했어요. 
“노파의 말은 언제나 옳아.”
그래서 탐색은 그만두게 되었어요.
그들은 자리에 앉아 먹었어요. 
노파는 그들의 포도주속에 물약 수면제를 넣어두었어요.
그래서 그들이 곧 지하실에 눕더니 코를 드르렁드르렁 골며 잠이 들었어요.
그 소리를 들은 신부가 큰 통 뒤에서 나와 ‘자고 있는 사람들’을 한 발 한 발 넘었어요.
왜냐면 그들이 땅바닥에 여러 줄로 늘어서 자고 있었기 때문이에요.
정말이지 잘못 밟아 그들을 깨울까 신부는 조마조마했어요.
하지만 하느님이 도우사, 그녀는 안전하게 그들을 넘을 수 있었어요.
노파는 그녀와 함께 위로 올라가 문을 열었어요.
그렇게 그녀들은 온 힘을 다해 살인자들의 소굴에서 탈출을 하였답니다.
강풍 탓에 흩뿌려져 있던 재들이 죄다 날아가 버렸지만, 완두콩과 ‘렌즈콩’(납작한 콩)들이 다행히 싹을 터 자라나 있어 달빛을 밭아 길을 안내해주고 있었어요.
그녀들은 하룻밤을 꼴딱 걸어 아침에서 방앗간에 도착했답니다.
처녀는 아빠에게 그동안 벌어진 일들을 소상히 알려주었어요. 
결혼식을 올리기로 한 날이 되고, 신랑이 모습을 드러내자, 방앗간 주인도 일가친척들과 친구들을 모두 초대하였답니다.
그들이 테이블에 앉음에 따라, 각자 한명씩 일어나 축하의 말을 하기로 했어요.
신부는 여전히 앉은 채 아무 말이 없었어요.
그러자 신랑이 신부에게 말했어요.
“어서, 당신, 아무 거라도 있지 않소? 편안히 우리 얘길 하시구려.”
그녀가 대답했어요.
(아래의 글 모두 신부의 대사입니다. 읽기 쉽게 단락을 임의로 나눔)
“그럼 제 꿈 얘기를 해볼게요. 숲 속을 홀로 걷다 마침 아무도 살지 않는 집 한 채에 들어갔답니다. 벽에 걸린 새장에 있던 새 한 마리가 외쳤지요.
‘돌아가요, 돌아가요, 이 젊은 처자”(처녀)야, 당신이 들어온 여긴 살인자들의 집이에요.’
그리곤 그 새소리가 다시 한 번 더 들렸죠.
(신부가 도둑인 신랑에게 하는 말) 아니, 자기 이건 그냥 꿈 얘기야. 
그리곤 난 모든 방들을 돌아다녀보았지만, 모두 텅텅 비어 있었어요. 하지만 그곳을 뒤덮은 무언가의 끔찍함이란!
마침내 저는 지하실로 내려갔지요.
거기에 아주 아주 나이 드신 노파 한 분이 고개를 흔들며 앉아 계셨어요.
제가 그녀에게 물었지요.
‘제 신랑이 이 집에 살고 있나요?’
그러자 그녀가 대답하길,
‘이런 불쌍한 애를 봤나, 여기가 어디라고 와, 여긴 살인자들의 소굴이야, 물론 너의 신랑도 여기 살고 있다, 하지만 그가 너를 보면 단번에 토막 내 죽일 게다, 그런 다음 너를 요리해 먹어치울 게다.’
어머 자기, 이건 그냥 내 꿈 얘기야.
하지만 그 노파가 저를 큰 통 뒤에 숨겨 주어 저는 간신히 위험에서 벗어났지요.
바로 그때 도둑들이 집으로 들이 닫쳤거든요. 그것도 웬 아가씨를 질질 끌면서 들어왔어요. 그들은 그녀에게 하얀, 빨강, 노란색으로 된 포도주를 각각 한 잔씩 마시게 해 결국 그녀의 심장이 두 동강이 나 터져 죽게 했지요.
(신부가 도둑인 신랑에게 하는 말) 아 자기, 이건 그냥 내 꿈이라고.
그 후 즉시 그들이 그녀의 아름다운 옷들을 벗겨내고 그 아리따운 몸을 식탁 위에 올리곤 토막을 내 소금을 흩뿌리더군요.
(신부가 도둑인 신랑에게 하는 말) 아 자기, 이건 그냥 내 꿈 얘기야. 
도둑들 중 한 명이 그녀의 새끼손가락에 껴져 있는 반지 하나를 보곤 빼내려다 잘 안 되자 도끼를 집어 들곤 살뚝 잘라버렸어요.
하지만 그 손가락은 공중으로 솟아올라 큰 통 뒤에 튀어와 제 가슴 속에 떨어졌지요.
자 여기, 이것이 바로 그 반지 낀 손가락이에요!” (←신부의 꿈 얘기 끝)


이렇게 말하며 그녀가 앞으로 나아가 참석한 사람들에게 그걸 보여주었어요.
그녀의 얘기가 진행되는 동안 점점 더 새파랗게 창백해져가던 도둑(=예비 신랑)이 펄쩍 뛰어오르더니 도망치려고 했어요.
하지만 손님들은 그를 단단히 붙잡아 재판정에 세웠어요.
그 후 그(=도둑=예비 신랑)와 그의 모든 잔당들은, 자신들의 악명 높은 범죄행위로 사형에 처해졌답니다. 

(동화 끝)

동화 「강도 신랑」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「강도 신랑」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter40.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



41. 코르베스 씨
(코르베스=사람이름. 씨=남자존칭)





옛날 옛적에 함께 드라이버(여행)를 나가고 싶어 한 수탉과 암탉이 있었어요.
그래서 수탉은 예쁘장하게 마차를 만들었어요. 빨간 수레바퀴가 네 개 달린 마차로 네 마리 생쥐들이 끄는 마차였답니다.
그 마차에 암탉이 수탉과 함께 앉아 드라이브를 나갔어요.
오래가지 않아 그들은 고양이를 만났어요.
고양이가 말했어요.
“얼씨구 어디 간데?”
수탉이 대꾸했어요.
“코르베스(남자이름) 씨(성씨) 댁(집)에 드라이브 가려던 참이야.”
“그럼 나도 데꼬가(데려가).”라며 고양이가 말했어요.
수탉이 대답했어요. “오케바리(기꺼이), 뒤에 타, 앞에 타면 떨어지니까. 우리 귀여운 빨간 수레바퀴들 밟지 않게 조심하고. 자 그럼 귀여운 수레바퀴들아 회전, 너희 귀여운 생쥐들 출발~, 이대로 코르베스 씨 댁까지 고고싱(가자).”
그런 다음 맷돌이 (마차에) 올라탔고요, 다음으론 달걀이 올라탔고요, 다음으로 오리가 타고, 다음으로 핀(꼭 집어 뭔가를 고정시키는 핀)이 타고, 마지막으로 바늘이 탔어요.
그들 모두 마차에 착석해 함께 드라이버를 하였답니다.
근데 에계계 이들이 코르베스 씨 댁에 도착해보니 정작 코르베스 씨 본인은 출타하고(외출하고) 안 계신 거예요.
그래서 일단 생쥐들이 마차는 헛간(창고)에 넣어두었어요.
암탉은 수탉과 함께 푸드덕 날아올라 횃대(새 장 안에 매단 막대기. 횃대 위에 새가 앉음) 위에 자리를 잡고 앉았어요.
고양이는 난로 옆에 자리를 잡고 앉았고요, 오리는 우물가 기둥에 가 앉았어요.
달걀은 데굴데굴 굴러가더니 수건으로 자신을 쏙 감싸앉았고요, 핀은 의자 쿠션 속에 자신을 콕 집어넣었고요, 바늘은 폴짝 점프를 해 배게 한 가운데를 자신의 침대 삼아 드러누웠고요, 맷돌은 현관 문 위에 자리를 잡고 앉았어요.
때마침 코르베스 씨가 집에 도착해 난로 가로 가 막 ‘불’을 피우려는데 거기 있던 고양이가 느닷없이 그(코르베스 씨)의 얼굴에 재를 한 무더기 뿌리는 거예요.
그(코르베스 씨)가 황급히 세수를 하러 부엌으로 뛰어 들어가는데 거기 자리 잡고 있던 오리가 난데없이 물을 그의 얼굴에 한 바가지 첨벙 첨벙 튀기를 거예요.
그(코르베스 씨)가 수건으로 물을 닦아내려고 하는데, 갑자기 달걀이 데굴데굴 굴러오더니 그와 딱 하고 부딪쳐 깨지며 그의 두 눈에 왈칵 달라붙었어요.
이게 대체 뭔 일인가 싶은 그(코르베스 씨)가 마음을 안정시키고 싶어 의자에 앉는데 핀이 그만 콕 하고 그를 찌르고 말았어요.
“으~악!”라며 아픔에 겨워 그가 쓰러지는데, 마침 그가 침대 위로 몸을 던졌지 뭐예요, 그의 고개가 베게에 가 닿자마자, 이번엔 바늘이 푹 하고 그에게 꽂혔고, 그는 정말이지 목청껏 비명을 “아악!”하고 지르며 동시에 성을 버럭 내며 넓은 바깥으로 뛰어나오다, 그만 그 현관문을 “벌컥!”하고 열어젖히다 그 위에 있던 맷돌이 “쿵!”하고 뛰어내리는 바람에 그는 맷돌에 맞아죽고 말았지요.
아니 대체 코르베스 씨가 뭔 죄란 말인가요, 넷!

(동화 끝)

동화 「코르베스 씨」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「코르베스 씨」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter41.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



42. 대부님
(대부는, 아기 세례식 때 참석하는 남자후견인임)





아이가 너무 많아서 마을에 있는 모든 사람들에게 이미 다 ‘대부’(아기 세례식 때 참석하는 남자후견인)님이 되어 달라 말해버린 어느 가난한 남자가 한 명 살고 있었어요.
그리고 또 한 아이가 태어나자, 이번엔 정말로 누굴 대부님으로 초대해야할지 망막할 정도로 대부 역할을 해줄 사람이 아무도 없었어요.
어찌할 바를 모르는 그가 당혹해하며 누워 쿨쿨 자고 있는데.
성문 밖에 나가 첫 번째로 마주치는 사람에게 대부를 부탁하라는 꿈을 꾸었지 뭐예요.
벌떡 일어난 그가 꿈대로 한 번 해보려 성문 밖으로 나가보니, 정말로 저기서 한 남자가 걸어오기에 다가가 자신의 아이 세례식 때 대부님이 되어 달라 청했지요.  
그 낯선 사람이 그에게 작은 물병을 하나 주며 말했어요.
“이건 영험한(신기한) 물이오, 이걸로 아픈 자를 치유할 수 있지. 당신은 다만 ‘사자’(사신. 죽은 사람을 데려가는 사람)가 어디에 서 있나만 유심히 보면 되오. 만약 사자가 환자의 머리맡에 서 있다면 이 물약을 환자에게 조금 줘 보시오 그럼 완치될 것이니, 하지만 사자가 발 옆에 있다면 어떤 노력도 헛수고가 될 것이고 환자는 죽고 말 것이오.”
이때부터 남자는 환자가 살지 죽을지를 말할 수 있게 되었고 이 기술로 아주 유명해진 것은 물론 어마무시 한 돈까지 벌게 되었지요.
한번은 왕자님이 아프셔서 불려가게 되었는데, 그가 들어가서 보니, 사자가 왕자님의 머리맡에 서 있기에 물약을 조금 먹여 완치시켰답니다.
그런 일이 똑같이 두 번 더 있은 다음, 세 번째 때 사자가 왕자님의 발 옆에 서 있기에 그는 이 아이가 곧 죽게 될 거란 것을 알았지요.
워낙에 잘 나가니 예전 그 대부님이 생각난 남자는 한 번 찾아가 뵙고 자신이 정말 대부님이 주신 물약 덕에 성공하게 되었다며 감사의 말을 전하고 와야겠다고 생각하기에 이르렀어요.
하지만 그가 집에 들어서니, 아니 눈앞에 펼쳐지는 이 낯선 광경이란!
계단을 밟고 올라간 첫 번째 층에선, 웬 빗자루와 샵(땅을 파는 샵)이 지들끼리 다투며 서로를 난폭하게 치고받고 있지 뭐예요.
그가 그들에게 물었지요.
“대부님은 어디에 계신지요?”
빗자루가 대꾸했어요.
“한 층 더 올라가 봐요.”
그가 2층에 올라가 보니, 이번엔 죽은 손가락들 한 무더기가 누워있는 게 보였어요.
그가 물었어요.
“저, 대부님은 어디에 계신가요?”
손가락들 중 하나가 대꾸했어요.
“한 층 더.”
3층엔 죽은 머리들이 한 무더기 놓여 있는데 그에게 한 층 더 올라가보라고 가리켜주었어요.
4층에서, 그는 물고기들이 불 위에 있는 게 보였어요. 그들은 프라이팬들 속에서 지글지글 소리를 내며 바짝 구워지고 있었어요.
그들도 역시 말했어요.
“한 층 더.”
이제 그가 5층으로 올라가 보니, 방문이 하나 나왔어요. 그래서 그가 열쇠구멍을 통해 안을 엿보니, 기다란 두 개의 뿔을 지닌 대부님이 거기 계신 게 보였어요.
그가 문을 열고 들어가 보니, 대부님은 침대로 황급히 들어가 이불로 몸을 덮었어요. 
그런 다음 그 남자가 말했어요.
“저, 대부님, 계시는 집이 참 요상합니다요! 1층에선 샵과 빗자루가 싸우며 서로를 난폭하게 때리고 있질 않나.”
“허허 어리석은지고!”라며 대부님이 말했어요. “그건 심부름소년과 하녀가 서로 대화를 나누고 있는 걸세.”
“하지만 2층에선 죽은 손가락들이 누워있는 걸 제가 다 본 걸요.”
“오, 띨띨한(어리석은)지고! 그건 그냥 ‘우엉 뿌리’(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/k6DkQ3 ) 몇 개야.”
“3층엔 죽은 사람의 머리들이 수북이 놓여 있던 걸요.”
“멍청아, 그건 양배추야.”
“4층에서 프라이팬에 담긴 생선들이 지글지글 소리를 내며 구워지고 있는 이 두 눈으로 다 본 걸요.”
그가 이 말을 하자마자, 그 생선들이 다가오더니 자신들을 요리로 내놓았다(상을 차렸다).
“제가 5층에 도착해 문의 열쇠구멍으로 안을 들여다봤더니 글쎄 거기에 대부님이 계시지 뭡니까, 이만치 길고 긴 뿔들을 있는 당신을, 당신을 제가 본 걸요.”
“어허, 아니라니까 그러네!”
깜작 놀란 남자가 도망쳐 나왔어요.
만약 도망치지 않았음 그가 그렇게도 존경해마지 않는 대부님이 그에게 뭔 짓을 어떻게 했을지 누가 알겠어요.

(동화 끝)

동화 「대부님」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「대부님」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter42.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



43. 트루데 아주머니
(트루데=마녀이름임)






옛날에 어찌나 고집이 세고 꼬치꼬치 캐묻기를 좋아하는지 그녀의 부모님이 뭐라 해도 전혀 들으려 하지 않는 철부지 소녀가 한 명 있었어요.
그래서 그녀의 끝이 어땠을까요?
어느 날 그녀가 부모님께 말씀드렸어요.
“트루데 아주머니 얘길 엄청 들었는데, 언젠가 한 번 가보려고. 사람들 말로는 그녀의 생김새가 이상하고 집에 참 별난 것들도 많이 가지고 있데, 그래서 나 한 번 가보고 싶어졌어!”
그녀의 부모님은 극구 말리며 말했어요.
“트루데 아줌마란 사람은 사악한 짓만 골라 하는 나쁜 여자란다. 네가 거길 가면 넌 더 이상 우리 애가 아닌 게야.”
하지만 소녀는 부모님의 금지령은 귀에 흘려듣고서 말 없이 트루데 아주머니에게 갔어요.
소녀가 그녀에게 가자, 트루데 아주머니가 말했어요.
“얼굴이 왜 그리 창백하냐?”
“아,”라며 소녀가 온 몸을 와들와들 떨며 대답했어요. “방금 본 게 너무나도 소름끼쳐서요.”
“방금 뭘 봤는데?”
“아주머니 집 계단에서 '검은 사람'(악마란 뜻도 있음)을 봤어요.”
“그건 ‘석탄 캐는 사람(갱부)’이다.”
“그 다음엔 초록색인 사람을 봤어요.”
“그건 사냥꾼이다.”
“그 후 피처럼 붉은 사람을 봤어요.”
“그건 정육점 주인이다.”
“아, 트루데 아주머니, 저 너무 떨려요. 창문 너머로 보니 아주머니는 안 보이고 정말 웬 악마(남자)가 불 앞에 앉아 있었거든요.”
“오호!”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “넌 방금 잘 차려 입은 마녀를 본 게다. 너를 이미 오래도록 기다리고 있었다. 넌 내게 불을 좀 줘야겠다.”
그런 다음 그녀는 소녀를 나무토막 하나로 바꾸더니 냉큼 불 속으로 던져버렸어요.
불꽃이 확 피어오르자, 그녀가 한 발자국 더 가까이 다가가 앉으며 몸을 따뜻하게 쬐며 말했지요.
“거참 환하게도 비치네.”

(동화 끝)

동화 「트루데 아주머니」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「트루데 아주머니」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter43.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



44. 대부가 된 저승사자
(대부는, 아기 세례식 때 참석하는 남자후견인임)





아이를 12명이나 둔 가난한 남자가 있었는데 그 바람에 애들을 먹여 살리기 위해 밤이고 낮이고 일을 해야 했어요.
그러다 덜컥 13번째 애가 태어나는 바람에 어찌할 바를 모르던 남자가 큰길로 뛰어나가며 처음 마주치는 사람을 아기의 대부(아기의 세례식 때 참석하는 남자후견인)로 청하리라 마음먹었어요.
다행히 그가 처음 마주친 이는 착하신 하느님이셨어요. 하느님은 그의 마음을 이미 다 알고 계셨어요. 
그래서 하느님이 말씀하셨어요.
“가련 한지고, 너를 동정하노라. 내가 네 아이의 세례식 때 아이를 붙들고 있으마. 그리고 그 아이를 책임질 것이고 이 세상에서 더없이 행복해지게 만드리라.”
남자가 말했어요.
“대체 누구시기에?”
“나는 하느님이다.”
“아 그럼 됐습니다. 저는 당신 같은 분을 아이 대부로 삼을 마음이 없습니다요.”라고 그 남성이 말했어요. “당신은 부자들만 챙기시잖아요, 가난한 사람들은 더 배고프게만 하시지요.”
남자가 이런 말을 한 이유는, 지혜로우신 하느님께서 어떻게 부와 가난을 할당하시는지 몰랐기 때문이에요.
여하튼 그는 하느님에게서 매몰차게 돌아서 쭉 더 걸어갔어요.
그러자 악마가 그에게 다가오며 말했어요.
“그래 누굴 찾고 있나? 만약 아기 대부를 찾는 거라면 나를 추천함세, 내가 그 아이에게 금은 물론 이 세상의 온갖 즐거움을 주지.”
남자가 물었어요.
“누구시기에?”
“나는 악마라네.”
“그럼 됐습니다. 당신을 아이 대부로 부탁할 마음이 없습니다요.”라며 그 남자 말했어요. “당신은 사람들을 속이고 파멸로 인도하니까요.”
그가 더 쭉 걸어가니, 이번엔 저승사자(죽음의 신)가 여위고 약한 두 다리로 그에게로 성큼성큼 걸어오며 말했어요.
“나를 대부로 삼게나.”
남자가 물었어요.
“당신이 누구신데요?”
“나는 저승사자라네, 나는 만인에 평등하다네.”
그러자 남자가 말했어요.
“당신이라면 좋습니다. 당신은 가난한 자나 부자나 언젠가는 데려가니까요, 차별이 없으시죠. 그럼 당신을 아이 대부로 삼겠습니다.”
저승사자가 대답했어요.
“내 자네 아이를 부유하고 유명해지게 만들어주겠네. 나를 친구로 삼은 자는 부족함이 없기 마련이거든.”
남자가 말했어요.
“다음 주 일요일 세례식이 있습니다. 꼭 참석해주십시오.”
저승사자가 약속한 시간에 나타나 응당 아기 세례식 때 대부들이 하는 대로 아기를 붙들고 서 있었습니다.
그 남자아이가 자라 어른이 되었을 때, 하루는 대부(저승사자)가 찾아와 그에게 자신과 같이 어딜 좀 가자고 제안했습니다.
저승사자는 그를 데리고 숲으로 가더니 거기 자라고 있던 어느 약초를 가리키며 말했어요.
“잘 봐둬라, 이건 네 대부의 선물이다. 나는 너를 저명한 의사로 만들 것이다. 네가 환자를 방문했을 때, 나는 항상 네게 보일 것이다. 만약 내가 아픈 자의 머리 쪽에 있거든 너는 환자를 다시 살릴 수 있다 말하고 이 약초를 주거라 그럼 환자가 회복될 것이다. 하지만 만약 내가 환자의 발 옆에 서 있으면 그건 환자가 내 거란 뜻이다. 너는 어떤 약을 쓰도 헛수고이며 세상의 어떤 의사가 와도 환자를 구할 수 없다 라고 말해야한다. 하지만 이 약초를 내 의지에 반해 사용하다가는 큰 코를 다치게 될 것이니 명심하거라.”
이윽고 젊은이는 온 세상에서도 가장 유명한 의사가 되었어요.
“아 글쎄 환자만 딱 봤다하면 죽을지 살지를 금방 아신다니까.”
이건 사람들이 그에 대해 하는 말이었습니다.
그리되니 아픈 사람이 생기면 멀리서 더 많이 그에게 사람을 보내왔고 돈도 원하는 만큼 두니 그는 금방 부자가 되었습니다.
그러다 그만 왕이 병에 걸리자 의사를 불러 회복이 가능한지 여부를 물어왔어요.
하지만 그가 침실에 들어갔을 때, 저승사자가 이미 환자의 발 옆에 서 있었어요. 즉 약초의 도움으론 왕을 살릴 수 없다는 뜻이었죠. 
“내가 한 번만 저승사자를 속일 수 있다면,”라며 그 의사가 생각했어요. “하지만 내가 그의 ‘대자’(대부가 후견을 약속한 아기)니까 이번 한 번만 내가 그를 속여도 눈감아주시겠지. 어디 한 번 해보자.”
그러면서 그가 환자를 들어 반대로 눕혔어요.
그 바람에 저승사자가 서 있는 장소가 환자의 머리 맡이 되었어요.
그런 다음 그가 왕께 약초를 약간 먹였더니 그가 회복되며 다시 점점 건강해졌어요.
하지만 이 일로 저승사자가 얼굴이 울그락불그락해져선 의사에게 다가와 말했어요.
“나를 속이다니. 좋아 딱 이번 한 번만은 용서해주마. 네가 내 대자(대부가 후견을 약속한 아기)이니. 하지만 다시 이딴 짓을 하였다간, 네 놈 목을 내놓게 될게다. 왜냐면 내가 너를 데려가 버릴 테니까.”
머지않아 왕의 따님이 중병에 걸리고 말았어요.
그녀는 왕의 유일한 자녀였어요.
그래서 왕이 밤낮 우셨지요. 그 바람에 왕이 시력을 점점 잃기 시작할 지경이었어요.
왕은 누가 되었건 공주를 구해내는 자를 공주의 남편으로 삼을 것이며 왕위를 물려주겠노라 선포하기에 이르렀어요.
그 의사가 아픈 여인의 침대에 갔을 때 보니 저승사자가 이미 그녀의 발 옆에 서 있는 게 보였어요.
그는 지난번에 자신의 대부(아기의 세례식 때 참석한 남자후견인)가 한 경고를 기억하고 있었어야 했어요. 
하지만 공주님의 너무도 아리따운 미모에 그만 얼이 빠진 그가 그녀의 남편이 될 행복감에 겨워 모든 생각을 바람결에 날려버리고 말았지요.
저승사자가 매서운 눈초리를 자신에게 던지고 두 주먹을 쥐어 보이며 그러지 말라고 위협하고 있었음에도 불구하고, 그는 아픈 여인을 들어 머리와 다리의 위치를 바꿔놓았어요.
그런 다음 그녀에게 약초를 약간 주니 즉시 그녀의 두 뺨이 빨갛게 발그레해지며 피가 도는 게 보였어요. 
저승사자는 두 번씩이나 이렇게 자신의 소유물을 속아 빼앗기자 의사에게 성큼성큼 다가와 말했어요.
“모두 끝났다, 이제 네 차례다.”
그러더니 저승사자는 자신의 얼음 같은 손아귀로 그를 꽉 붙들었어요.
그는 저항할 수가 없어 저승사자가 이끄는 대로 지하의 동굴로 끌려갔답니다.
거기서 그는 보았어요. 수천 개의 수천 개의 촛불들이 무수히 많은 열을 지어 타고 있는 것을요.
어떤 촛불은 커다랗고, 어떤 건 중간 크기였고, 어떤 건 자그마했어요. 
매순간 어떤 건 꺼졌고, 매순간 어떤 건 다시 불이 붙었어요.
그래서 불꽃들이 여기저기로 끊임없이 뛰어다니는 듯 보였어요.
“보아라.”라며 저승사자가 말했어요. “이게 인간의 생을 밝히는 촛불들이야. 큰 것들은 아이들의 것이다. 중간 크기의 촛불들은 한창 때 결혼한 남녀를 가리키며, 작은 촛불들은 노년들의 것이다. 하지만 아이들이나 젊은이들도 종종 자그마한 촛불로 태어나곤 한다.”
그럼 제 생의 촛불은 어디 있나요.“라며 의사가 말했어요. 아마도 아주 큼직할 거라 생각했거든요.
저승사자가 끝부분만 조금 남아 거의 꺼질 랑 말랑 흔들리고 있는 촛불 하나를 가리키며 말했어요.
”봐라, 저게 너이다.“
“아, 대부님,”라며 겁에 질린 의사가 말했어요. “저를 위해 새로운 초에 붙여주십시오. 저를 사랑하신다면 그리해 주세요. 전 이제 왕도 되고 절세미녀인 공주의 남편도 되어 인생이 막 즐거워지려던 참이라고요.”
“그럴 순 없다.”라며 저승사자가 대답했어요. “새로운 촛불을 밝히기 전에 반드시 먼저 하나를 꺼야하기 때문이다.”
“그럼 거의 다 된 제 촛불을 새로운 초위에 놓아주세요. 그러면 다 된 촛불이 꺼지자마자 새 초로 불이 옮겨 붙어 새로 타오를 거 아니에요.”
의사가 애걸복걸했어요.
저승사자는 마치 자신이 정말로 그의 소원을 충족시켜주는 듯 행동하며 커다란 새 초를 집어 들었어요. 하지만 복수하려는 열망이 강했기에 초 둘을 붙이는 듯 하다가 의도적으로 실수를 해, 거의 약간의 조각만 남았던 그 촛불을 떨어뜨려 꺼지게 하고 말았어요.
그 즉시 의사가 바닥에 쓰러졌어요.
이제 그(의사)는 영락없이 저승사자의 손에 들어오게 된 것이죠.

(동화 끝)

동화 「대부가 된 저승사자」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「대부가 된 저승사자」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter44.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



45. 엄지둥이의 여행



어떤 재봉사에게 아들이 하나 있었어요. 원체 작은 아이였지요, 엄지손가락만큼요.
그래서 그 애를 모두 엄지둥이라 불렀답니다.
하지만 그는 용기가 상당했어요.
그래서 아빠에게 말했어요.
“아빠, 나 세상에 나가볼래.”
“그래라, 내 아들아.”라며 그 노인이 말했어요. 노인은 긴 바늘을 하나 집어 들더니, 봉랍(=왁스) 한 조각을 그 바늘에 붙이고 촛불에 대며 말했어요.
“가는 길에 이 검을 지니고 다니렴.”
꼬마 재봉사(엄지둥이)는 출발하기 전 부모님과 식사를 하고 싶어, 폴짝폴짝 뛰어 부어으로 가 엄마가 막 요리를 끝내신 게 뭔지 봤어요.
하지만 엄마는 막 음식을 담아 불가 위에 놓아두었지 뭐예요.
그래서 그가 말했어요.
“엄마, 오늘은 뭐 먹을 건데?”
“한 번 보려무나.”라며 엄마가 말했어요.
그래서 엄지둥이가 불가로 폴짝 뛰어올라 접시 안을 살짝 봤어요.
하지만 그만 목을 너무 길게 빼며 들여다보다 음식에서 생긴 수증기에 몸이 휩싸여 굴뚝 위로 확 올라가고 말았어요.
잠깐, 바람을 타고 하늘 여기저기를 돌아다닌 후, 결국 그는 다시 땅에 내려올 수 있었어요.
이제 꼬마 재봉사(엄지둥이)는 드넓은 세상 밖으로 나왔어요. 그렇게 그는 여기저기 여행하며 다니다 결국 어떤 재봉사 밑에 들어가게 되었어요. 그런데 그 집 음식이 너무 자기와 안 맞는 거예요.
“주인마님, 제발 음식도 맛난 거 좀 주심 안돼요?”라며 엄지둥이가 말했어요. “안 그러심, 저 내일 아침 일찍 여길 떠나며 이 집 문 앞에 분필로 이렇게 적을 거예요. ‘감자는 너무 많고, 고기는 너무 적네! 안녕, 감자 왕씨.’라고요.”
“이 메뚜기 같은 게, 어쩜 그리도 어이가 없니?”라며 주인마님이 화를 대며 행주 하나를 집어 들며 막 그를 내리치려 했어요.
하지만 우리의 꼬마 재봉사는 잽싸게 ‘골무’(바느질 할 때 손가락 끝에 끼우는 물건. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/FEpLPz ) 밑으로 기어들어가, 그 밑에서 밖의 상황을 엿보며 주인마님을 향해 “메롱 메롱”하며 혀를 날름날름 내밀어보였지요.
주인마님이 그 골무를 집어 들며 그를 붙잡으려하자, 꼬마 엄지둥이는 잽싸게 옷감 속에 깡충 뛰어 들어갔어요. 
주인마님이 옷감을 열어젖히며 그를 찾자, 그는 식탁의 갈라진 틈 속으로 들어갔어요.
“호, 호, 아줌마,”라며 그가 소리치며 고개를 빼쭉 내밀자, 그녀가 그를 때리려했고, 그러자마자 그가 다시 폴짝 뛰어 서랍 속으로 들어갔어요.
그 바람에 결국 그는 그녀에게 붙잡혀 집 밖으로 내쫓기고 말았답니다.
뭐 어쨌든 우리의 꼬마 재봉사는 여행을 계속했어요, 그러다 큰 숲에 들어가게 되었는데, 거기서 우연히도 왕의 보물창고를 훔치려고 작당하고 있던 도둑의 무리와 마주쳤지 뭐예요.
꼬마 재봉사를 본 그들이 생각했어요.
‘얼씨구, 저 녀석이 열쇠구멍 속으로 기어들어갈 수 있겠는데, 자물쇠를 여는 도구로 요긴하게 써먹을 수 있겠어.’
“안녕,”라며 그들 중 한 명이 소리쳤어요. “거인 ‘골리앗’(성경에 나오는 거인)이여, 너 우리랑 보물창고로 가지 않으련? 네가 미끄러져 들어가 우리에게 돈을 던져주기만 하면 돼.”
엄지둥이가 잠시 생각하더니 결국 말했어요.
“넵~”
그리하여 그는 그들과 함께 보물창고로 갔어요.
그런 다음 그는 자신이 들어갈 틈새가 있는지 문들의 위아래를 살펴보았어요.
이내 곧 그가 들어갈 수 있을 만치 넓은 틈새를 하나 발견했어요.
그가 막 들여가려는데, 문 앞에 서 있던 두 보초병들 중 한 명이 그(엄지둥이)를 주시하다 다른 보초병에게 이렇게 말했어요.
“엄청 못생긴 거미 한 마리가 기어 들어가려는데, 어때 죽일까?”
“뭘 그딴 거에 신경 써, 그냥 둬.”라며 다른 보초병이 말했어요. “네게 해코지한 것도 없잖아.”
그리하여 우리의 엄지둥이는 안전하게 갈라진 틈을 통해 보물창고로 진입할 수 있었어요.
그가 창문을 여니 아래쪽에 도둑들이 대기하며 서 있었어요.
그가 은화를 하나씩 그들에게 던져주었어요.
그가 한창 순조롭게 이 일을 하고 있는데, 왕이 보물창고를 점검하기 위해 걸어오고 있는 소리가 들려 엄지둥이는 황급히 은신처로 몸을 숨겼어요.
은화가 몇 개 사라진 것을 대번에 왕이 발견했어요. 하지만 도대체 누가 훔쳐간 건지 알 길이 없었지요. 왜냐면 그 보물창고의 자물쇠들이며 빗장들이 멀쩡했거든요. 게다가 보초병들도 이상 없었다 말했고요.
그래서 다시 자리를 떠며 왕이 보초병들에게 말했어요.
“감시 잘해, 누군가 돈을 노리는 듯 하니.”
그 후 엄지둥이가 다시 자신의 일을 시작했기 때문에, 보초병들의 귀에도 돈이 “짤랑, 짤랑, 짤랑!” 움직이는 소리가 들렸어요. 
도둑을 잡으러 그들이 황급히 들어왔을 때, 그들이 들어오는 소리를 들은 꼬마 재봉사가 그들보다 훨씬 더 빨리 구석으로 깡충 뛰어가 은화로 몸을 가렸답니다.
그래서 그들은 그를 발견하지 못했어요, 그와 동시에 그가 보초병들을 놀리며 소리쳤지요.
“나 여깃지롱(여기 있지롱)!”
그러자 보초병들이 오른쪽으로 뛰어가 보았어요.
하지만 그들이 오른쪽으로 가자, 벌써 왼쪽 구석에 가 은화로 몸을 숨기고 있던 엄지둥이가 소리쳤지요.
“호, 호, 나 여깃지롱!”
보초병들이 황급히 왼쪽으로 뛰어가 보았지만, 이미 우리의 엄지둥이는 세 번째 구석으로 들어가 이렇게 소리치고 있었어요.
“호, 호, 나 여깃지롱!”
그런 식으로 그가 보초병들을 놀려대며 한 동안 보물창고 여기저기를 뛰어다니자, 보초병들도 지친 나머지 나가버리고 말았어요.
그리하여 차근차근 엄지둥이는 모든 은화를 창밖으로 내던질 수 있었답니다.
마침내 마지막 은화를 있는 힘껏 내던진 다음 그도 민첩하게 그 은화 위에 깡충 올라타 창문을 통해 아래로 날려 내려왔어요.
도둑들이 침이 마르도록 엄지둥이를 칭찬하고 또 칭찬했어요.
“자넨 용감한 영웅이네.”라며 그들이 말했어요. “이 참에 우리의 두목이 되는 건 어떤가?”
하지만 엄지둥이는 거절하며 말했어요.
“우선 세상을 좀 더 돌아다녀보고 싶어요.”
도둑들이 은화들을 나누려하자, 우리의 꼬마 재봉사는 자신이 들고 갈 수 없다며 딱 하나의 은화만 요구했어요.
그런 다음 받은 은화 한 개를 자신의 검으로 몸에 채우곤(허리띠를 채우듯이) 도둑들에게 작별인사를 한 다음 길 가로 나갔어요.
처음엔 몇몇 유명한 재봉사들 밑에 들어가 일을 해보았지만 그 닷 마음에 맞지 않았어요.
그러다 최종적으로 여인숙에서 하인으로 일을 하게 되었답니다. 
하지만 하녀들은 그를 견딜 수 없었어요.
왜냐면 하녀들 자신들이 은밀하게 하는 짓들을 그가 죄다 보곤 주인 부부에게 “하녀들이 접시들을 빼돌려요, 지하창고에서 뭘 빼돌려요 등등”라며 일러받쳤기 때문이지요.
결국 하녀들이 말했어요.
“두고 봐, 되갚아줄 테니까!”
하녀들은 그에게 나쁜 짓을 할 궁리들을 찾아다녔죠.
곧 하녀들 중 한 명이 정원에서 잔디를 베고 있는데, 미워죽겠는 엄지둥이가 이리저리 깡충깡충 뛰어다니며 풀 위로 기어올랐다 다시 아래로 뛰어내려왔다 하며 놀고 있는 모습이 눈에 들어왔어요. 
그녀가 단번에 잔디를 그와 함께 베어서는 큰 천에 감싼 다음 젖소들에게 먹으라고 몰래 던져주었어요.
젖소들 중에 크고 검은 젖소가 다행히도 엄지둥이를 다치게 하지 않고 꿀꺽 삼켜버렸지요.
하지만 소의 위(소의 위는 4개)까지 내려간 엄지둥이는 여간 답답한 게 아니었어요.
방이 너무 깜깜하고 촛불하나 있지 않았기 때문이지요.
누가 젖소의 젖을 짤 때면 그가 소리쳤어요.
“쭉, 쭉, 쫙, 양동이(우유 담는 통) 곧 가득 차지 않나요?”
하지만 우유 짜는 소리에 묻혀 그가 외치는 소리가 안 들렸지요.
이런 후 한 번은 여인숙 주인장이 젖소 우리(외양간)에 오더니 말했어요.
“저 젖소를 내일 잡아야겠다.”
그러자 엄지둥이는 깜짝 놀라 똑똑한 목소리로 고함을 질렀어요.
“우선 저를 좀 꺼내주세요, 여기 안에 저가 있단 말이에요.”
주인은 이 소리를 잘 들었어요. 하지만 도대체 그 소리가 어디서 나는 건지를 가늠할 길이 없었죠.
“얼씨구 어디서 나는 소리냐?”라며 그가 물었어요.
“검은 거(검은 젖소의 위) 안에요.”라고 엄지둥이가 대답했어요.
하지만 주인은 그 말의 의미를 이해할 수 없어서 그냥 나가버렸어요.
다음날 아침 그 젖소가 도축되었어요.
천만다행히도 엄지둥이는 고기를 자르고 써는 칼날과 부딪히지 않았답니다.
그래도 자신이 소시지용(=순대용) 고기 사이에 들어가는 것까진 피하지 못했지요.
곧 고깃간 주인이 오더니 일을 시작했어요. 
엄지둥이가 있는 힘껏 소리를 질렀어요.
“너무 깊숙이 자르지 마여, 너무 깊숙이 자르지 마여, 그 사이에 제가 있으니까요.”
하지만 고기 써는 칼날 소리가 워낙에 시끄러워 아무도 그 소리를 듣지 못했답니다.
불쌍한 엄지둥이로선 정말 멘붕이었어요.
하지만 그 와중에도 기지를 발휘하여, 칼날이 내리칠 때마다 있는 힘껏 칼날 사이를 요리조리 피해 다녔답니다. 그래서 간신히 칼날은 피했는데, 하지만 그렇다고 빠져나온 건 아니었어요. 게다가 베이컨(삼겹살) 조각들과 함께 검푸른 ‘푸딩’(=소시지=순대) 속에 넣어지는 것까지 피하지 못했거든요.
그는 이제 비좁은 푸딩(=소시지=순대) 속에 갇혀 연기 나는 굴뚝 속에 매달려 있게 되었어요. 끔찍이도 무겁게 대롱대롱 매달려 있었지요.
마침내 겨울이 되자 사람들이 그 푸딩(=소시지=순대)를 도로 끄집어냈어요. 
어느 손님(여인숙임)에게 드리기 위해서였답니다.
여인숙 안주인이 푸딩을 잘게 쓸었어요. 엄지둥이는 머리를 바짝 끌어당긴 덕분에 가까스로 잘리는 걸 피할 수 있었답니다.
마침내 그가 기회를 봐 탈출에 성공해 힘껏 뛰어내렸어요.
하지만 이 죽을 고비를 넘기고 나니 도저히 이 여인숙에서 더는 있고 싶지 않았어요.
그는 즉시 여행길에 다시 올랐답니다.
하지만 자유는 그리 오래가지 않는 법.
탁 터인 들판으로 나오자마자 그는 여우에게 발각되고 마침 배고프든 여우는 그를 덥석 삼켜버렸어요.
“안녕, 여우 씨.”라며 꼬마 재봉사가 소리쳤어요. “네 목구멍에 달라붙은 게 바로 나란다. 나를 다시 뱉어주렴.”
“내가 왜, 맛있기만 한데.”라며 여우가 물었어요. “하지만 네(엄지둥이) 아빠가 안마당에서 키우는 닭들은 내게 주겠다고 약속하면, 내가 너를 놓아줄 수 있어.”
“기꺼이 그럴게.”라며 엄지둥이가 대답했어요. “수탉들과 암탉 모두를 네게 주겠다고 약속해주께.”
그러자 여우가 다시 그를 뱉더니, 그를 집까지 데려다주었어요.
아빠는 사랑하는 아들을 다시 보게 되자 기뻐서 집에서 키우고 있던 모든 닭들을 그 여우에게 선 듯 내주었어요.
“아빠 죄송해요, 제가 드릴 건 이 동전 한 닢밖에 없어요.”라며 엄지둥이가 여행도중 받은 은화를 한 닢 아빠에게 드리며 말했어요.
“그런데 아빠 왜 그 여우에게 불쌍한 병아리들까지 다 준 거야?”
“오, 요 귀요미, 그건 네 아빠가 마당에서 키우는 닭들보다 아들을 훨씬 더 사랑하기 때문이지!”

(동화 끝)

동화 「엄지둥이의 여행」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「엄지둥이의 여행」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter45.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



46. 피처의 새
(피처는 동화 속 ‘나쁜 마법사’이름임. 피치=족제비. 피처=‘족제비처럼 나쁜 사람’이란 뜻이 아닐지? 영어사전엔 ‘피처’라는 단어가 없음 ㅠ_ㅜ)






옛날 옛적에, 가난한 남자로 변장하고서 집에 방문해 먹을 것을 요구하다 예쁜 여인들을 보면 잡아가는 아주 못된 마법사가 한 명 살고 있었어요.
그가 어디로 여인들을 데려가는지 아무도 몰랐답니다. 왜냐면 한 번 끌려간 여인들은 다시 볼 수 없었기 때문이죠.
그러던 하루는 그 마법사가, 아주 예쁜 세 딸들을 둔 남자 집 현관 앞에 나타났어요.
그는 가난하고 힘없는 거지로 변장하고서 등에 바구니를 이고 와 자비의 선물(여인)을 담아갈 작정이었죠.
그는 음식을 약간 구걸했는데, 큰딸이 나오더니 빵 한 조각을 그에게 건넸어요, 그때 그가 그녀를 한 번 툭 치자 그녀가 반강제로 바구니 속으로 쏙 뛰어 들어갔답니다.
그 후 즉시 그가 성큼성큼 빠른 속도로 사라져버렸어요. 
그는 그녀를 데리고 자신의 집이 있는 깊은 숲속으로 들어갔어요. 거긴 숲 한가운데에 있는 집이었어요.
그 집엔 모든 게 정말 입이 딱 벌어질 정도로 갖추어져 있었어요.
그는 그녀가 바라는 건 뭐든지 주며 말했어요.
“자기, 여기서 나랑 행복하게 있자, 나랑 있음 자기가 원하는 건 뭐든 가질 수 있어.”
이렇게 며칠이 지속되었어요.
그때 그가 말했어요.
“난 여행을 가야하니, 당신만 잠시 있구려, 여기 이건 이 집의 열쇠들이오. 어디든 가고 싶은 대로 가도 되고 보고 싶은 대로 봐도 되나, 이 작은 열쇠로 열리는 방 하나만은 열어봐선 안 되오. 내 말을 어겼다간 죽음의 고통이 당신을 덮칠 거요.”
그는 또한 달걀 하나도 그녀에게 건네주며 말했어요.
“나를 위해 이 달걀을 잘 간직해주시오. 이걸 항상 몸에 지니고 다니시오, 이걸 잃으면 큰 불행이 닫치게 될 거요.”
그녀가 열쇠 꾸러미와 그 달걀을 건네받으며 남자의 말을 따르겠다고 약속했어요.
그가 외출했어요.
그녀는 집의 바닥에서부터 꼭대기 층까지 모두 돌아다니며 뭐가 있나 구경하였어요.
방들은 은과 금으로 빛나고 있었어요.
이토록 화려한 방들을 그녀는 일찍이 본 적이 없었지요.
마침내 그녀가 금지된 방문 앞에 도착했어요.
처음엔 그냥 지나치려했어요. 정말요. 하지만 호기심이 그녀를 가만두지 않았지요.
그녀가 열쇠를 살펴보니, 그건 그냥 여타 열쇠들과 똑같아보였어요. 
그녀가 그 열쇠를 열쇠구멍에 넣고 살짝만 돌려봤을 뿐인데도 문이 덜컹하고 다 열렸어요.
아, 그녀가 발을 들여놓았을 때 보인 그 광경이란?
유혈이 낭자한 큰 대야 하나가 방 한가운데에 서 있고, 그 안엔 죽임을 당해 토막 난 사람의 형상들이 마치 땔감 나무 쌓여 있던 수북이 들어 있었어요. 보기만 해도 섬뜩한 도끼 한 자루가 한 쪽에 놓여 있었지요.
그녀는 너무도 겁에 질려 손에 쥐고 있던 달걀을 대야 속에 떨어뜨리고 말았어요.
그녀가 다시 그 달걀을 꺼내 핏자국을 씻어내려 해보았지만 헛수고였어요.
핏자국을 씻어냈다 싶음 즉시 다시 생겨났으니까요.
그녀가 씻고 문지르고 해보았지만 지워지지가 않았어요.
머지않아 남자가 여행에서 돌아왔어요.
그가 가장 먼저 요구한 것은 열쇠와 그 달걀이었어요.
그녀가 그에게 건넸어요. 건넬 때 그녀가 너무도 와들와들 떨었기 때문에 남자는 단번에 그녀가 피투성이 방에 들어갔었다는 것을 간파했어요.
“내 경고를 어기고 기어이 그 방엘 들어갔었군.”라며 그가 말했어요. “자 이젠 싫어도 거기로 다시 가 보실까. 네 목숨은 끝났어.” 
그가 그녀를 넘어뜨리더니 머리채를 붙들곤 거기까지 질질 끌고 가, 머리를 자르곤 몸을 토막 냈어요. 그 바람에 그녀의 피가 바닥위에 흥건하게 고였어요.
그런 다음 그가 그녀의 나머지 부분들을 대야 속에 던져버렸어요.
“자 그럼 둘째를 데려와 볼까.”라며 마법사가 말했어요.
그가 다시 가난한 사람으로 변장하고서 그 집에 나타나 음식을 구걸했어요.
그러자 둘째 딸이 빵 한 조각을 그에게 건네주었어요. 
그는 그녀에게도 큰딸처럼 했듯 한 번 톡 치며 잡고는 달아나버렸어요.
그녀의 운명도 큰언니보다 나을 게 없었어요.
그녀도 호기심에 이끌려 피가 낭자한 방문을 열었다 그 끔찍한 광경을 보곤 기겁해 달걀을 떨어뜨리고 말았지요.
마법사가 돌아와 그 사실을 알고는 죽였거든요.
그런 다음 그는 셋째 딸인 막내를 가 데리고 왔어요.
하지만 그녀는 재기가 넘치고 술수가 많았어요.
그가 그녀에게 열쇠꾸러미와 그 달걀을 주고 떠나자, 그녀는 먼저 그 달걀을 조심스레 한 쪽에 따로 보관하곤, 집을 구경하기 시작했어요.
마침내 그녀도 그 금지된 방에 발을 들여놓고 말았어요.
아아, 그녀가 본 그 끔찍한 광경이란!
그녀의 두 언니들이 대야 속에 있었어요. 그것도 잔인무도하게 살해당해 토막 난 채로요.
하지만 그녀는 놀라는 것에 그치지 않고, 언니들의 손과 발을 한 곳으로 모아 차례대로 붙였어요. 머리, 몸, 팔, 다리 순으로요.
그러자 손과 발들이 움직이기 시작하더니 이내 나머지 몸들과 합쳐지며, 두 처녀들이 눈을 번쩍하고 떴어요. 어머, 언니들이 다시 살아났지 뭐예요.
그런 다음 그녀들이 좋아하며 서로를 키스하며 달래주었어요. 
그가 도착하자, 즉시 열쇠꾸러미와 달걀을 요구했어요.
하지만 어떤 핏자국도 묻지 않은 달걀을 받아들자 그가 말했어요.
“당신은 시험을 통과했소이다. 그러니 이제 당신은 내 정식 신부가 될 것이요.”
그리하여 그는 더 이상 그녀에 대한 권한을 가지지 못하게 되었어요.
그녀가 하자는 건 뭐든 하게 되었죠.
“오, 좋아요,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “그러려면 당신은 먼저 금화를 바구니에 가득 담아 등에 이고 가 우리 아빠 엄마에게 전해주고 오셔야 되요. 그러는 동안 저는 결혼식을 준비하고 있을 게요.”
그런 다음 그녀(=막내딸=셋째 딸)는 작은 방에 숨어 있던 언니들에게로 달려가 말했어요.
“언니들을 구할 수 있는 순간이 왔어. 그 자를 속여 언니들을 집까지 이고가게할 거니까, 언니들은 집에 도착하는 대로 도움을 청하고 나를 구하러 와죠.”
그녀가 언니들을 바구니에 들어가게 한 다음 그 위에 금화를 가득 담아 언니들을 숨겼어요. 그 바람에 누구도 발각되지 않았답니다. 
그런 다음 그녀(막내딸)가 그 마법사를 불러 말했어요.
“자 이 바구니를 이고 가 주세요, 제가 작은 창문을 통해 당신이 가는 도중 멈춰 게으름을 피우는지 지켜볼 거예요.”
마법사가 그 바구니를 등에 이곤 출발했어요.
하지만 바구니가 너무 무거워 그의 얼굴에서 땀이 비질비질 흘러내렸어요.
그러자 그가 앉아 잠시 쉬었다 가려고 했어요.
그 순간 바구니 속에 있던 여인들 중 한 명이 소리쳤어요.
“제가 작은 창문을 통해 지켜보고 있다 말씀드렸지요, 게으름을 피우는지 제가 다 지켜보고 있어요. 얼른 출발해주세요?”
그는 자신의 신부가 뒤에서 소리 지르는 거라 생각하고서 다시 일어나 걸었어요.
그러다 한 번 더 그가 앉으려 하는데, 그 즉시 그녀(바구니 속에 있는 언니)가 소리쳤어요.
“제가 작은 창문을 통해 지켜보고 있다 말씀드렸지요, 게으름을 피우는지 제가 다 지켜보고 있어요. 얼른 출발해주세요?”
이렇게 그가 멈춰 쉬려고만 하면 그녀가 외쳤고 그 바람에 그는 계속해서 걸었답니다.
마침내 너무 힘들어 끙끙 앓는 신음소리를 내며 금화와 두 처녀가 든 그 바구니를 등에 이고 그가 그녀들의 부모님 집에 도착했어요.
한편 집(마법사의 집)에서 결혼식 만찬을 준비하던 신부(막내딸)는 마법사의 친구들에게 초대장을 보냈어요.
그런 다음 이빨을 드리우며 씩 웃고 있는 머리를 하나 집어 들어 거기에 몇몇 장신구(장식품)들을 붙이고 화환(꽃다발)을 씌어 위층 다락방 창문에 걸어놓아 밖에서 보이게 했어요.
모든 준비가 완료되자, 그녀는 꿀 통 속에 들어갔고, 그런 다음 깃털 침대를 뜯어 그 속에 몸을 뒹굴었어요. 그래서 그녀는 마치 희한한 새처럼 보였어요. 누구도 그녀를 알아볼 수 없었지요.
그런 다음 그녀가 집밖으로 나와 걸었어요.
가는 도중에 결혼식 초대 손님들 몇몇과 마주쳤는데, 그들이 물었어요. 
“오, ‘피처’(피처는 동화 속 ‘나쁜 마법사’이름임. 피치=족제비. 피처=‘족제비처럼 나쁜 사람’이란 뜻이 아닐지? 영어사전엔 ‘피처’라는 단어가 없음 ㅠ_ㅜ)의 새 구나, 네가 어떻게 여기 있니?”
“피처의 집에서 방금 나왔어요.”
“그래 지금쯤 젊은 신부는 무얼 하고 있든?”
“지하층에서 다락방까지 빡빡 쓸며 청소를 하고 있어요. 다락방 창문에 그녀가 얼핏 보이는 것 같던데요.” 
마침내 그녀(막내딸)가 신랑과도 마주쳤어요.
신랑은 지쳐 아주 천천히 돌아오고 있는 중이었지요.
그도 다른 이들과 마찬가지로 물었어요.
“오, ‘피처’(족제비처럼 나쁜 마법사란 뜻)의 새 구나, 네가 어떻게 여기 있니?”
“피처의 집에서 방금 나왔어요.”
“그래 지금쯤 어린 신부는 무얼 하고 있든?”
“지하층에서 다락방까지 빡빡 쓸며 청소를 하고 있어요. 다락방 창문에 그녀가 얼핏 보이는 것 같던데요.” 
신랑을 올려다보니 정말로 예쁘게 치장한(꾸민) 머리가 보여서 그게 자신의 신부인 줄 알고 그녀에게 고개를 끄떡여 보이며 아주 상냥하게 인사를 했어요.
하지만 그와 그의 손님들이 모두 그 집으로 들어갔을 때, 신부의 오빠들과 일가친척들이 그녀(=신부=막내딸)를 구하러 도착했어요.
그들은 집에서 나오는 모든 문들을 잠갔어요. 그래서 아무도 탈출할 수 없었죠. 그런 다음 그들이 집에 불을 놓았어요. 
그리하여 그 마법사는 자신의 패거리(동료)들과 함께 몽땅 불에 타버렸답니다.

(동화 끝)

동화 「피처의 새」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「피처의 새」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter46.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



47. 노간주나무 (그림형제 버전)(무서운 동화)

★★ 주의 ★★ (동화 읽기 전 반드시 읽어보실 것)

이 동화 「노간주나무」는 작품성이 있지만, 일부 내용이 무척 잔인합니다. 새엄마가 자신이 낳지 않은 아들을 죽인다는 내용과, 그걸 아빠가 모르고 ○는다는 내용이 나옵니다. 
동화라 직접적인 묘사는 없지만, 그래도 혹시 거부감이 생기시면 안 읽으셔도 됩니다. 


(본문 시작)

지금으로부터 아주 오래전에, 그러니까 거의 2천여 년 전에, 아름답고 신앙심이 깊은 아내와 사는 어느 부자 남편이 살고 있었어요.
그들 부부를 서로를 참 많이도 사랑했어요.
하지만 자녀가 없었죠. 비록 그들이 아이를 가지길 간절히 바랬고, 아내가 밤낮으로 기도를 드렸지만, 아이는 생기지 않았어요.
그들 부부의 집 앞 마당엔 노간주나무 한 그루가 자라고 있었어요.
겨울 어느 날 아내가 그 노간주나무 아래에 서서 손수(=직접) 사과 껍질을 깍고 있었어요.
그러다 그만 손가락을 베여 피가 눈 위에 떨어졌어요. 
“아,”라며 아내가 깊은 한 숨을 쉬며 말했어요. 
그녀는 자신 앞에 떨어진 핏방울들을 보고 아주 불행해졌어요.
“아, 피처럼 붉고 눈처럼 새하얀 아니 하나만 가졌으면!”
그 말을 내뱉자 그녀는 아주 행복해져서 곧 무슨 일이 생길 것만 같이 느껴졌어요.
그런 다음 그녀는 집 안으로 들어갔어요.
그렇게 한 달이 지나고 눈도 다 녹았어요.
두 달이 지나자 모든 곳에 초록이 돋아났고요.
세 달이 지나자 사방에서 꽃들이 다시 꽃을 피웠어요.
네 달이 지나자 숲에 있는 모든 나무들이 두껍게 자라나 초록의 가지들로 휘감기며 새들이 노래하면서 숲에 노랫소리들이 돌아오고 꽃들이 나무에서 떨어졌어요.
다섯 달이 지나자, 그녀는 자신이 노간주나무 아래 서 있는 게 너무도 달콤해 심장이 콩닥콩닥 뛰어 무릎을 꿇고 앉아 기뻐서 어쩔 줄을 몰랐어요.
여섯 달이 지나자, 과일들이 커지고 발그레해지며, 그녀는 마음이 차분해졌어요.
일곱 달이 되어 그녀는 ‘노간주나무 열매’(포도처럼 생겼음. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/ObCqPc )들을 따다 맛나게 먹었는데 그러자 점점 병이 나는지 슬퍼졌어요.
여덟 달이 지나가자 그녀가 남편을 자기 쪽으로 부르더니 소리내 울며 말했어요.
“제가 죽거든 노간주나무 아래에 묻어주세요.” 
그 다음 달이 끝나가자 그녀는 아주 만족해지고 행복해졌어요. 그리고 그 달 그녀는 눈처럼 새하얗고 피처럼 붉은 아이 하나를 낳았어요. 아이를 보았을 때 너무도 기뻐 그녀는 죽고 말았어요.
그녀의 남편은 그녀를 노간주나무 아래에 묻어준 다음 애달프게 울기 시작했어요.
일정 시간이 지난 후 비록 슬픔을 주체할 수 없어 가끔 울긴 했어도 보다 마음이 안정이 되었어요.
일정 시간이 좀 더 지난 후 그는 새 아내를 가졌어요.
그는 이 두 번째 아내에게서 딸을 하나 낳았어요.
이땐 이미 그와 첫 번째 아내 사이에 낳은 아이는 꼬마 소년이었어요.
소녀는 피처럼 붉고 눈처럼 새하얬어요.
새엄마는 자신의 친딸을 볼 때면 무척 사랑스러웠지만, 이 꼬마 소년을 볼 때면 심장이 베이는 듯 했어요.
왜냐면 이 소년이 그녀 자신의 인생에 방해거리가 될 거 같다는 생각이 자꾸 들었거든요.
그녀는 사실 부자 남편의 전 재산을 어떻게 하면 자신의 친딸이 다 차지할까만 생각하고 있었으니까요.
악마가 이런 식으로 그녀의 마음에 들어서고 난 후부턴 그녀는 소년만 보면 여길(소년의 몸) 철썩 때리고 저길(소년의 몸) 퍽 주먹으로 때렸어요.
그래서 불행한 소년은 학교에서 집으로 돌아오기만 하면 세상 어디에도 마음의 안정을 취할 수 없을 정도로 계속해서 두려웠어요.
어느 날 그녀가 2층 자기 방으로 가는데, 자신의 어린 친딸이 같이 올라오며 말했어요.
“엄마, 나 사과 한 개만.”
“그래, 내 새끼,”라며 그녀가 친딸에게 대형 궤짝(=상자)에서 참한 사과를 하나 꺼내 주었어요.
하지만 그 대형 궤짝(=상자)은 커고 예리한 철제 자물쇠로 잠긴 두껍고 무거운 뚜껑이 하나 달린 궤짝이었어요.
“엄마,”라며 어린 친딸이 말했어요. “하나만 더, 오빠 주게.”
이 말이 그녀를 무척 화나가 만들었지만, 그녀가 애써 말했어요.
“그래, 오빠가 학교에서 돌아오면.”
그때 때마침 창문을 통해 소년이 귀가하는 것이 보였어요. 악마가 이 순간을 놓치지 않고 속삭이자, 그녀가 친딸에게 준 그 사과를 낚아채며 말했어요.
“오빠가 오기 전에 먹으면 안 돼.”
그런 다음 그녀(소년의 새엄마)가 그 사과를 대형 궤짝 안에 내던지더니 뚜껑을 닫아버렸어요.
어린 소년이 문에 나타나자, 악마가 그녀로 하여금 그 소년에게 친절하게 이렇게 말하게 했어요.
“내 아들아, 사과 하나 주련?”
그려가 심술궂게 소년을 쳐다보았어요.
“어머니,”라며 어린 소년이 말했어요. “눈빛이 너무 무서우세요! 네, 제게 사과 하나만 주세요.” 
그러더니 그녀는 마치 소년에게 강요하는 듯 이렇게 말했어요.
“이리 와,”라며 그녀가 대형 궤짝의 뚜껑을 열며 말했어요. “사과 하나 집어 보려무나.”
눈처럼 새하얀 그 어린 소년이 대형 궤짝 안으로 몸을 구부리는 동안, 악마가 마침내 그녀를 덮쳐버려, “꽝!”하고 그녀가 뚜껑을 세차게 닫아버렸어요.
그러자 소년의 머리가 나가떨어지며 새빨간 사과들 사이에 떨어졌어요.
그런 다음 공포가 그녀를 엄습했어요.
그려가 생각했어요.
‘만약 내가 살려면 이게 내 짓으로 보여선 안 돼!’
그래서 그녀는 2층 자신의 방에 있는 서랍장으로 가 맨 위 서랍에서 새하얀 손수건 한 장을 꺼내와, 소년의 고개를 소년의 목에 다시 올리곤 아무도 눈치 못 채게 손수건으로 감싼 후, 소년을 문 앞에 있던 의자에 앉혀 놓고 소년의 손에 사과도 하나 쥐어주었어요.
이 후 ‘마를렌’(여동생이름)이 부엌에 있는 엄마에게 왔다.
엄마는 불가에 서서 냄비에 든 뜨거운 물을 연신 휘젓고 있었다. 
“엄마,”라며 마를렌(여동생이름)이 말했다. “오빠가 문가에 앉아 있어, 그런데 손에 사과 하나를 쥐고 있는데 표정이 아주 창백해 보여. 사과 한 입만 달라는데도 아무 대답도 없고, 나 너무 무서워.”
“다시 가 보거라,”라며 그녀의 엄마가 말했다. “이번에도 네 대답에 대답 안하거든, 따귀를 한 대 갈겨 보거라.” 
그래서 마를렌은 오빠에게 가 말했어요.
“오빠, 사과 한 입만.”
그래도 오빠가 말이 없자, 그녀가 오빠 귀 싸대기를 한 대 갈겼어요. 그러자 오빠의 머리가 나가떨어지고 말았어요.
마를렌은 화들짝 놀라 울고불고 난리를 치며 엄마에게로 달려가 말했어요.
“아아, 엄마, 내가 오빠 머리를 찢고 말았어!”
그러면서 그녀는 울고 또 울었지만 절대 위안이 되지 않았어요.
“마를렌,”라며 엄마가 말했어요. “도대체 뭔 지을 한 거니? 하지만 조용해라 아무도 모르게. 이제 어쩔 수 없이, 그를 ‘블랙푸딩’(순대처럼 생긴 소시지의 일종. 재료=고기+지방+빵+양파+밤+보리+오트밀 등등)으로 만들어야겠다.”
그런 다음 엄마는 어린 소년을 데려와 ○막 내 썰고는 냄비에 넣어 블랙푸딩을 만들었다. 
하지만 마를렌은 옆에 서서 울고 또 울었다. 
그녀가 어찌나 소스라치게 놀라며 우는지 눈물방울들이 냄비에 떨어지며 소금을 칠 필요가 없었다.  
그때 아빠가 귀가해, 저녁식사를 하러 자리에 앉으며 말했다. 
“어, 내 아들은 어딨지?”
엄마는 블랙푸딩을 한 접시 가득 담아주었다. 
마를렌은 울었다. 도무지 그녀를 멈추게 할 수 없었다. 
그때 아빠가 다시 말했다. 
“어, 내 아들은 어딨지?”
“아,”라며 엄마가 말했다. “그 애는 걔 엄마의 ‘할아버지의 동생’(=종조부)을 만나러 시골 내려갔어. 거기서 잠시 머물겠데.”
“거긴 뭐 하러? 내게 인사도 않고 가.”
“오, 가고 싶어 갔겠지, 6주 머물다 와도 되냐고 내게 묻던데, 거기서 잘 돌보겠지.”
“아,”라며 그 남성이 말했다. “그럼 안 되는데 쓸쓸하군. 내게 인사 정도는 하고 갔어야지.”
이 말을 하며 그녀가 먹기 시작했다. 
그가 말했다. 
“마를렌, 너 왜 우니? 네 오빤 금방 돌아올 게다.”
그런 다음 그가 말했다 .
“아, 여보, 이 음식 기가 막히게 맛난데, 좀 더 줘봐.”
그는 먹으면 먹을수록 더 달라고 했다. 
그가 말했다. 
“더 많이 줘봐, 당신들은 한 입도 먹지 마. 꼭 나를 위해 태어난 음식 같은 걸.”
그래서 그는 먹고 또 먹으며 뼈들을 몽땅 식탁테이블 아래에 던졌어요. 
마침내 그가 몽땅 다 먹어버렸어요.
하지만 마를렌은 자신의 서랍장으로 가더니 맨 아래 서랍에서 자신이 가진 손수건들 중에서 가장 좋은 비단 손수건을 꺼내 식탁테이블 아래에서 뼈들을 모두 주워 담아 자신의 비단 손수건으로 살포시 감싼 다음 피눈물을 흘리며 문 밖으로 옮겼다. 
그러자 노간주나무가 저절로 약간 흔들리기 시작하며, 가지들이 따로따로 벌어지더니, 마치 사람이 기뻐하며 손뼉을 치는 마냥, 가지들이 다시 합께 움직이기 시작했다.  
그와 동시에 엷은 안개가 나무에서 피어나는 것 같더니, 그 안개 한가운데가 마치 불처럼 타, 아름다운 새 한 마리가 ‘장려한’(=화려한) 노래를 부르며 불에서 푸드덕 뛰쳐나오더니 하늘 높이 하늘 높이 날아가 버렸다. 
그(=소년=새)가 사라지자, 노간주나무는 다시 예전 모습을 되찾았지만, 뼈들이 담긴 손수건은 더 이상 거기 없었다. 
하지만 마를렌은 마치 그녀의 오빠가 여전히 살아있기라도 하는 듯 명량해지고 행복해졌다. 
그래서 그녀는 즐겁게 집으로 들어가 저녁식사를 하러 자리에 앉은 다음 음식을 먹었다.  
하지만 날아갔던 그 새가 우연히도 ‘금세공인’(세공=손으로 하는 정밀한 공예)의 집 지붕 위에 모습을 드러내더니 울기 시작했다.  
(새의 노래시작→) “내 엄마는 나를 죽이고, 내 아빠는 나를 먹었네, 내 여동생, 귀여운 마를렌이, 내 뼈들을 모아, 비단 손수건에 감싼 다음, 노간주나무 아래에 놓아주었다네, 
짹짹, 짹짹, 나는 얼마나 아름다운 새인가!” (←새의 노래 끝)
그 ‘금세공인’(세공=손으로 하는 정밀한 공예)은 자신의 작업장에 앉아 금 목걸이를 만들고 있다 자신의 지붕 위에 앉은 새가 노래부르는 것을 듣게 되었어요. 너무도 아름다운 노래이지 뭐예요.
그는 일어나 문지방(=문 아래에 가로로 댄 나무)을 넘다 노래에 취해 자신의 실내화 하나가 벗겨지는 것도 몰랐어요.
그는 발 한쪽엔 구두를 신고 다른 발 한 쪽엔 양말 차림으로 그리고 앞치마를 한 채, 한 손엔 금 목걸이를 들고 다른 한 손엔 ‘니퍼’(=펜치. 철사를 절단하는 공구)를 쥐고, 가게가 있는 거리 한 복판으로 나가보았어요. 
거리 위로 햇살이 눈부시게 내리쬐고 있었어요. 
그런 다음 그는 지붕 쪽으로 똑바로 나아가 서며 그 새에게 말했어요.
“새야.” 그런 다음 그가 계속 말을 이었어요. “네 노랫소리가 참 아름답구나! 내게 한 곡조(=노래)만 더 들려주면 안 되겠니.”
“안돼요,”라며 그 새가 말했어요. “저는 공짜로는 두 번 노래하지 않았요! 그 금 목걸이를 제게 주시면, 그렇담 당신을 위해 다시 노래해드릴게요.”
“여깃다,”라며 그 금 세공인이 말했어요. “여기 이 금 목걸이를 네게 주마, 이제 그 노래를 다시 내게 들려주려무나.”
그러자 새가 아래로 내려와 오른쪽 발톱에 그 금 목걸이를 쥐곤 다시 날아가 금 세공인의 앞에 앉으며 노래했어요.
(새의 노래시작→) “내 엄마는 나를 죽이고, 내 아빠는 나를 먹었네, 내 여동생, 귀여운 마를렌이, 내 뼈들을 모아, 비단 손수건에 감싼 다음, 노간주나무 아래에 놓아주었다네, 
짹짹, 짹짹, 나는 얼마나 아름다운 새인가!” (←새의 노래 끝)
그런 다음 그 새는 ‘제화공’(구두 만드는 사람)의 집으로 날아가 그 집 지붕위에 모습을 드러내며 노래했어요.
(새의 노래시작→) “내 엄마는 나를 죽이고, 내 아빠는 나를 먹었네, 내 여동생, 귀여운 마를렌이, 내 뼈들을 모아, 비단 손수건에 감싼 다음, 노간주나무 아래에 놓아주었다네, 
짹짹, 짹짹, 나는 얼마나 아름다운 새인가!” (←새의 노래 끝)
제화공(구두 만드는 사람)이 그 노랫소리를 듣고 ‘셔츠’(남자 옷 상의) 바람으로 나와 자기 집 지붕 위를 올려다보려다 찬란하게 빛나고 있던 햇살에 눈이 멀지 않게 손으로 눈을 가렸어요. 
“새야,”라며 그가 말했어요. “네 노랫소리가 참말로 아름답구나!”
그러더니 그가 문 안으로 사람들을 불렀어요.
“여보, 당장 밖으로 나와 봐, 새가 한 마리 왔어, 나와서 새 좀 봐봐, 노래를 엄청 잘 해.”
그런 다음 그는 자신의 딸과 아이들도 부르고, 직원(도제공)들도 부르고, 심부름하는 소년들과 소녀도 불렀어요. 
그들 모두 거리로 나와 새를 바라보니 정말로 아름다운 새이지 뭐예요, 빨강과 초록인 깃털들이 아주 화려한 새였어요. 게다가 목엔 진짜 금 목걸이도 하고 있었어요. 머리에 있는 두 눈이 마치 별처럼 반짝이고 있는 아름다운 새였어요. 
“새야,”라며 그 제화공(구두를 만드는 사람)이 말했어요. “이제 그 노래를 다시 한 번 불러주지 않으련.”
“아뇨,”라며 그 새가 말했어요. “전 공짜로 두 번이나 노래를 불러주진 않아요. 제게 무언가를 주셔야 해요.”
“여보,”라며 그 남성이 말했어요. “다락방에 가면, 맨 위쪽 선반에 빨간 구두 ‘한 켤레’(=왼발+오른발)가 놓여 있거든, 그걸 얼른 가져와봐.”
그래서 아내가 가더니 그 구두를 가지고 왔어요.
“옜다, 새야,”라며 그 남성이 말했어요. “자 이제 우리에게 그 노래를 다시 불려주지 않으련.”
그러자 새가 내려와 왼쪽 발톱으로 그 신발을 낚아채 지붕으로 도로 날아올라가더니 노래를 시작했어요.
(새의 노래시작→) “내 엄마는 나를 죽이고, 내 아빠는 나를 먹었네, 내 여동생, 귀여운 마를렌이, 내 뼈들을 모아, 비단 손수건에 감싼 다음, 노간주나무 아래에 놓아주었다네, 
짹짹, 짹짹, 나는 얼마나 아름다운 새인가!” (←새의 노래 끝)
노래를 다 부른 후 새는 날아가 버렸어요.
새는 이제 오른쪽 발톱엔 금 목걸이를 쥐고, 왼쪽 발톱엔 구두 한 켤레를 쥔 체로, 방앗간 쪽 방향으로 날아갔어요.
(물방아가 돌아가는 소리→) “덜커덩덜커덩, 덜커덩덜커덩, 덜커덩덜커덩.”
방앗간엔 20명의 방앗간 직원들이 모여 맷돌 하나를 툭탁, 툭탁, 툭탁 소리를 내며 잘라 만들고 있었어요.   
방앗간의 물방아도 계속해서 덜커덩덜커덩, 덜커덩덜커덩, 덜커덩덜커덩 소리를 내고 있었고요.
그때 그 새가 날아오더니 방앗간 앞에 서 있는 ‘피나무’(흘리는 피가 아니라 높이 20미터 지름 1미터 정도의 나무이름임. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/XeVs8b ) 위에 앉더니 노래를 부르기 시작했어요,(←쉼표임. 마침표 아님)
“내 엄마는 나를 죽이고,”
그러자 직원들 중 한 명이 일손을 멈추었어요,
“내 아빠는 나를 먹었네,”
그러자 직원 두 명이 일손을 멈추고 그 노랫소리를 들었어요,
“내 여동생, 귀여운 마를렌이,”
그러자 직원 네 명이 일손을 멈추었어요,
“내 뼈들을 모아, 비단 손수건으로 감싼 다음,”
이제 8명의 직원만이 맷돌을 갈고 있었어요,
“아래에 놓아주었다네,”
이제 5명만이, 
“노간주나무,”
이제 딱 한 명만이,
“짹짹, 짹짹, 나는 얼마나 아름다운 새인가!”
그러자 마침내 그들 모두가 일손을 멈추고 이 마지막 가사를 듣고 있었어요.
“새야,”라며 직원이 말했어요. “네 노랫소리가 참 아름답구나! 내게 그 노래를 다시 한 번 들려주지 않겠니. 한 번만 더 노래해주길 바래.”
“아뇨,”라며 그 새가 말했어요. “전 공짜로 노래를 두 번 하지는 않아요. 제게 그 맷돌을 주세요, 그럼 다시 불려드릴게요.”
“좋아,”라며 그가 말했어요. “하지만 이건 내꺼만은 아니라서, 뭐라 말 못하겠는데.”
“괜찮아,”라며 다른 사람들이 말했어요. “노래를 한 번 더 한다면야, 저 새보고 가지라해.”
그러자 그 새가 날아 내려왔고, 20명의 방앗간 직원들 모두가 달라붙어 ‘도리’(수평 목재)로 그 맷돌을 올려주었어요.
그 새가 자신의 목을 그 맷돌 구멍에 박고는 마치 그게 ‘칼라’(옷의 상의 칼라. 목 주위)인양 맷돌을 목에 걸치더니 다시 나무 위로 날아가 노래를 부르기 시작했어요.
(새의 노래시작→) “내 엄마는 나를 죽이고, 내 아빠는 나를 먹었네, 내 여동생, 귀여운 마를렌이, 내 뼈들을 모아, 비단 손수건에 감싼 다음, 노간주나무 아래에 놓아주었다네, 
짹짹, 짹짹, 나는 얼마나 아름다운 새인가!” (←새의 노래 끝)
그(=소년=새)는 노래를 다 부른 다음 오른 발톱엔 목걸이를 왼쪽 발톱엔 구두를 쥐고 목엔 맷돌을 두르곤 날개를 펄럭이며 자신의 아빠 집 쪽 방향으로 날아갔어요. 
방엔 아빠와, 새엄마, 그리고 마를렌(=여동생. 아빠와 새엄마의 딸)이 저녁식사를 하고 있었었어요. 
아빠가 말했어요. 
“내 기분이 다 명량해지며 행복해지는걸!”
“아니,”라며 엄마가 말했어요. “난 마치 폭풍우가 다가오는 듯 마음이 불편해.”
하지만 마를렌이 앉아서 울고 또 울고 있는데 어디선가 그 새가 날아와 지붕에 자리를 잡고 앉았어요.
아빠가 말했어요.
“아, 진짜 행복해, 바꺝 햇살도 무척 아름답게 비치고 있고, 마치 정든 옛 친구를 다시 만날 것 같은 기분이야.”
“아니,”라며 그 여자가 말했어요. “난 너무 걱정이 돼서 이빨들이 후들거려, 마치 정맥(심장으로 되돌아오는 현관. 피부 표면에 있는 혈관들)들에 불이 붙은 듯 한 느낌이야.”
그 여자는 속이 타들어가고 있었어요.
하지만 마를렌(소년의 엄마 다른 여동생)는 구석 모퉁이에 앉아선 울고 있었어요.
마를렌이 자기 앞에 놓인 접시를 부여잡고 울고 또 우는 바람에 음식이 완전히 젖어 버렸을 정도에요.
그때 그 새가 노간주나무 위에 앉으며 노래 불렀어요,(←쉼표)
“내 엄마는 나를 죽이고,”
그 순간 새엄마가 귀를 막고 두 눈을 감고 아무 것도 듣고 보려하지 않았어요,(←쉼표)
하지만 그 노래는 그녀의 귀에 마치 가장 사나운 폭풍우 마냥 요동치고 있었어요,
그녀의 두 눈이 그 노랫소리에 마쳐 타들어가는 듯 마치 번개가 치는 듯 했어요,
“내 아빠는 나를 먹었네,”
“아, 세상에,”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “저 봐 엄청 아름다운 새야! 어찌나 화려하게 노래를 부르는지, 햇살이 무척 따사롭게 비치고 있고, 계피(향료)를 친 듯 한 향이 나.”  
“내 여동생, 귀여운 마를렌이,”
그러자 마를렌은 무릎에 고개를 파묻고 그치지 않고 울고 있었어요.
하지만 아빠는 말했어요.
“나가 봐야지, 저 새를 좀 더 가까이서 보고 싶은 걸.”
“오, 가지 마,”라며 그 여자가 말했어요. “온 집이 마치 불이 붙은 듯 흔들리는 느낌이 들어.”
하지만 그 남자는 밖으로 나가 그 새를 쳐다보았어요. 
“내 뼈들을 모아, 비단 손수건에 감싼 다음, 노간주나무 아래에 놓아주었다네, 짹짹, 짹짹, 나는 얼마나 아름다운 새인가!”
이 노래를 하며 새가 금목걸이를 떨어뜨렸는데, 그게 정확히 아빠의 목에 딱 걸쳐지며 아름답게 반짝반짝거렸어요.
그런 다음 아빠가 집안으로 들어가 말했어요.
“저 새가 한 것 좀 봐봐, 엄청 좋은 금목걸이를 내게 줬는걸, 무척 귀여운 놈이야!”
하지만 그 여자는 겁을 먹고 방바닥에 쓰러지는 바람에 그녀가 쓰고 있던 모자가 머리에서 떨어지고 말았어요.
그때 새가 다시 노래를 부르기 시작했어요.
“내 엄마는 나를 죽이고,”
“저 소리 좀 안 들을 수 있다면 천 미터 땅 밑에라도 가련만!”    
“내 아빠는 나를 먹었네,”
그러자 그 여자가 마치 죽은 듯 또 다시 쓰러지고 말았어요.
“내 여동생, 귀여운 마를렌이,”
“아,”라며 마를렌이 말했어요. “나도 나가 볼래, 저 새가 내게 무얼 주나 보게.” 그러면서 그녀가 밖으로 나가보았어요.
“내 뼈들을 모아, 비단 손수건으로 감싼 다음,”
그때 그(=소년=새)가 구두(구두 한 결례)를 그녀에게 던졌어요.
“노간주나무 아래에 놓아주었다네, 짹짹, 짹짹, 나는 얼마나 아름다운 새인가!”
마음이 쾌활해지고 즐거워진 마를렌이 빨간 새 구두를 신고 집 안에서 폴짝 폴짝 뛰며 춤을 추었어요.
“아,”라며 마를렌이 말했어요. “밖에 나갈 땐 무척 슬프더니 지금은 기분이 무척 좋아졌어, 저건 착한 새야, 내게 이 빨간 구둔 한 결례를 줬는걸!”
“그래,”라며 그 여자가 마치 불이라도 붙은 듯 머리카락이 곤두서선 두 발로 벌떡 일어나며 말했어요. “세상에 종말이 온 듯한 기분이다! 기분이 좀 좋아지는지 나도 한 번 나가봐야겠다.” 
그녀가 문을 열고 나가자마자, 쿵! 하고 새가 목에 매달고 있던 맷돌을 던져 그녀는 그 맷돌에 깔려 완전히 뭉개지고 말았어요.
뭔 일이 난 것을 듣고 아빠와 마를렌이 나가보니, 거기서 연기와 불꽃 그리고 화염이 피어오르고 있었어요. 그 불길이 사라지자 어린 소년이 서 있었어요.
소년은 아빠와 마를렌의 손을 잡고서, 셋 다 무사한 걸 기뻐하며 저녁식사가 차려져있는 집으로 다시 들어가 맛있게 저녁을 먹었어요.  

(끝)

동화 「노간주나무」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「노간주나무」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter47.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



48. 늙은 개 술탄



옛날에 술탄이라고 불리는 충직한 개를 한 마리 둔 농부가 있었어요.
그 개는 늙었기 때문에 이빨이 몽땅 다 빠졌어요. 그래서 더 이상 뭔가를 꽉 물지를 못했어요.
어느 날 그 농부가 현관문 앞에 서서 아내에게 말했어요.
“아무래도 내일 저 늙은 술탄을 총으로 쏘아야겠소, 더는 쓸모도 없고.”
너무도 충실한 동물이었기에 동정심이 생긴 아내가 대답했어요.
“오래도록 우리에게 봉사해온 애인데, 충실하기도 하니, 그냥 둬도 되잖아요.”
“어! 뭐라고?”라며 남자가 말했어요. “당신은 모질지를 못해. 입에 이빨이 하나도 안 남은 녀석을 어떤 도둑이 무서워하겠어. 이제 꺼질 때도 됐지. 녀석이 우리에게 봉사해온 건 맞지만, 우리도 사실 녀석을 그동안 잘 먹여왔잖소.”
멀지 않은 곳에서 내리쬐는 햇볕 속에 팔다리를 쭉 뻗고 늘어져 누워있던 불쌍한 개가 이 모든 말들을 듣고 말았어요.
그러니 내일 자신의 제삿날인 걸 알고 너무도 상심했지요.
그에게는 친한 친구가 한 명 있었어요. 늑대에요. 
개는 밤에 숲으로 기어가 그를 만나 자신을 기다리고 있는 운명을 한탄했어요.
“기운 내!”라며 늑대가 말했어요. “내 말을 들어봐, 친구. 내가 너를 위기에서 구해줄 수 있을 거야. 내가 생각해봤는데. 내일 아침 일찍 네 주인은 마누라와 함께 건초(풀)를 베러 갈 거야, 그럼 집에 아무도 없느니 자신들의 아기도 일하는 데에 함께 데려갈 거고. 그럼 일하는 동안 아기를 그늘진 산울타리 아래에 두겠지. 그때 넌 그 옆에 있어. 마치 아기를 보호하길 원하는 것처럼 말이야. 그럼 내가 숲에서 튀어나와 아기를 물고 달아날게. 넌 재빨리 나를 쫓으라고. 마치 내게서 아기를 구하려는 듯이 말이야. 그럼 내가 아기를 두고 갈게, 넌 그때 아기를 다시 부모에게로 가져가면 돼. 그들은 네가 구한 줄 알 거고 고마워서 네게 감히 어떤 해코지도 하지 않으려 들 거야. 그럼 넌 이제 주인의 은총을 입으며 한 점 부족함 없이 다시 지낼 수 있을 거야.”
개도 그 계획이 마음에 들었어요.
일은 계획대로 실행되었고, 늑대가 아기를 물고 들판을 빠져나가는 것을 본 아빠는 비명을 질렀어요.
그때 늙은 개 술탄이 다시 아기를 구해 와서, 아빠는 더없이 기뻐하며 개를 쓰다듬어주며 말했어요.
“이제 네 털 끝 하나 다치게 하지 않으마. 네가 살아 있는 동안 마음껏 먹고 지낼 수 있게 해주마.”
아빠는 그러면서 아내에게 말했어요.
“여보 어서 집에가 늙은 개 술탄이 먹을 만한 것 좀 만들어봐, 얘는 씹질 못하니 부드러운 걸로. 그리고 내 침대에 있는 베개를 얘가 베고 누울 수 있게 해주구려.”
이후 늙은 개 술탄은 정말이지 더없이 행복하게 잘 지냈어요.
이내 곧 그 늑대가 그를 찾아와 계획인 성공한 것에 만족한다 말했어요.
“그래서 말인데, 친구.”라며 늑대가 말했어요. “내가 네 주인의 살찐 양 마리만 물고 가는 걸 슬쩍 눈 감아 줄래.”
“꿈도 꾸지 마.”라며 그 개가 대답했어요. “난 내 주인에게 충직한 개란 말이야. 그 계획에 동의할 수 없어.”
더는 말을 꺼낼 수 없겠다 생각한 늑대는 그날 밤에 몰래 기어들어와 막 양을 물고 떠나려했어요.
하지만 이미 충직한 개 술탄에게서 늑대의 계획을 전해들은 농부가 늑대를 잡아 ‘도리깨’(곡식의 낟알을 떠는 농기구. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/qjlfUX )로 흠뻑 두들겨 패주었어요.
늑대는 빈손으로 내쫓기며 개를 향해 소리쳤어요.
“이 벌어먹을 불한당(깡패)아, 내 꼭 이 앙갚음을 하리라.”
다음날이 밝자 늑대가 친구인 멧돼지를 통해 도전장을 개에게 보냈어요.
“숲에서 한 판 뜨자(싸우자)!”
늙은 개 술탄은 패싸움에서 자신을 도와줄 친구가 한 명도 없었어요.
다만 다리가 셋 뿐인 고양이 한 마리뿐이었죠.
어쩔 수 없이 다리를 절뚝거리는 그 고양이와 단 둘이 숲으로 향했답니다.
고양이는 다리를 절뚝거리느라 고통스러워 자신의 꼬리를 위로 쭉 뻗고서 걸었답니다.
늑대와 친구 멧돼지는 벌써 약속 장소에 도착해 있었어요.
하지만 싸우기로 한 적이 다가오는 것을 보았을 때 그들(늑대와 멧돼지)은 고양이가 ‘기병도’(긴 칼. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/aLoUKp )를 품고 온다고 생각하고 말았어요.
왜냐면 고양이가 하늘로 치켜세운 꼬리가 정말로 멀리서보면 그렇게 보였기 때문이지요.
게다가 그 불쌍한 동물(고양이)이 세 발로 깡충깡충 걷는 모습이 마치 발 한 자국마다 자신들에게 던질 돌멩이를 하나씩 줍는 듯이 보였지 뭐예요. 
그래서 그들 둘(늑대와 멧돼지)은 겁에 질리고 말았어요.
급기야 멧돼지는 ‘큰 나무 밑의 잔 나무’ 사이로 기어들어갔고요, 늑대는 나무 위로 뛰어올라갔어요.
개와 고양이는 그들이 왔는데도, 약속 장소에 아무도 보이지 않자 의아하게 생각했어요.
하지만 야생 멧돼지가 자신의 몸을 완전히 다 숨기질 못해 두 귀 중 하나가 그만 밖으로 삐죽 들어나고 말았어요.
주변을 호기심가득 살펴보던 고양이가 때마침 멧돼지의 튀어나온 귀 한 쪽이 까딱까딱 움직이는걸 보고 말았어요,
고양이는 그게 움직이는 생쥐일 거라 생각해 냉큼 덤벼들어 확 깨물고 말았어요.
멧돼지가 끔찍한 비명을 지르며 울며불며 도망쳤어요. 
“나쁜 놈은 내가 아니라 나무 위에 있다고.”
개와 고양이가 위를 쳐다보니 정말 늑대가 있었어요.
늑대는 자신이 패싸움을 제안해놓고 겁쟁이마냥 몸을 숨겼다는 사실에 너무도 창피해 계속 개와 친구로 지내기로 합의하고 말았어요. 부끄러우니까요.

(동화 끝)

동화 「늙은 개 술탄」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「늙은 개 술탄」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter48.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



49. 여섯 마리 백조



옛날 옛적에, 어떤 왕이 울창한 숲속에서 사냥을 하다 야생 들짐승을 뒤쫓았는데 그의 부하들 누구도 그를 따라붙질 못했어요.
거의 밤이 될 무렵 그가 멈춰 주변을 둘러보고서야 자신이 길을 잃었다는 사실을 깨달았죠.
그가 길을 찾으려 해보았지만 헛수고였어요.
그때 고개를 심하게 끄떡이는 노파 한 명이 그에게로 다가왔어요. 하지만 그녀는 마녀였어요. 
“이보게,”라며 왕이 그녀에게 말했어요. “내게 숲에서 나가는 길을 알려주겠나?”
“오, 네, 국왕폐하.”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “그러고 말고요, 다만 한 가지 조건이 있습니다요, 들어주시지 않음 저도 길을 알려드릴 수 없고 그럼 폐하는 여기서 굶어죽게 될 겁니다.”
“조건이 무언가?”라며 왕이 물었어요.
“제겐 딸내미가 하나 있습니다요.”라며 그 노파가 말했어요. “이 세상 누구보다 아름다운 아이지요, 당신의 배우자가 될 만한 자격을 갖춘 아이랍니다. 그러니 그 아이를 당신의 왕비로 삼아 주신다면 제가 숲에서 빠져나가는 길을 알려드리지요.”
고민을 거듭한 끝에 왕이 승낙했다. 
그러자 노파가 왕을 데리고 자신의 작은 오두막으로 데리고 갔다. 
거기에 자신의 딸이 불가에 앉아 있었다. 
그녀(딸)는 마치 그가 올 것을 알았다는 듯이 왕을 마중 나왔어요.
왕이 보니 그녀가 정말 아름다웠어요. 하지만 뭐랄까 왠지 탐탁치가 않은 인상을 받았어요. 섬뜩한 기분 없이는 그녀를 쳐다볼 수 없었답니다.
그 후 왕이 그 처녀를 말 등에 태웠어요.
노파가 왕에게 길을 알려주었어요.
그래서 왕이 다시 궁전으로 갈 수 있었지요.
궁전에 도착한 왕이 결혼식을 성대하게 올렸어요.
사실 왕은 지난번에 한 번 결혼을 하였었어요. 그래서 첫 번째 아내와의 사이에서 일곱 아이를 두었어요. 아들 여섯에, 딸 하나였지요. 
왕은 이 일곱 아이들을 이 세상 어느 누구보다도 더 사랑했어요.
왕은 두려웠어요. 새엄마가 아이들을 잘 대해주지 않을 것을요, 혹은 해코지라도 할까 염려되었지요.
그래서 왕은 아이들을 숲 한가운데에 있는 외딴 성채에 옮겨놓았어요.
그곳은 너무도 꼭꼭 숨겨진 곳이라, 만약 현명한 여인 한 명이 왕에게 신기한 능력이 있는 ‘실 뭉치’ 하나를 주지 않았다면, 왕 자신도 찾아가기가 무척 힘이 들었을 거예요.
왕이 그 실 뭉치를 자기 앞에 톡 던지고 나면, 그 실 뭉치가 저절로 굴러가며 그에게 길을 알려주었지요.
하지만 왕이 너무나 자주 사랑하는 아이들에게로 달려가다 보니, 새 왕비도 뭔가 낌새를 채고 말았어요.
그녀는 호기심이 생겨 왕이 숲속으로 왜 혼자서만 가는지 뭐하러 가는지를 알고 싶었어요.
왕비는 왕의 부하들에게 엄청난 뇌물을 주었어요. 그랬더니 부하들이 왕비에게 비밀을 털어놓았어요. 즉 길을 알려줄 수 있는 공 같은 게 있다는 거예요.
일이 이쯤 되니 왕비는 왕이 그 실 뭉치를 어디가 감추었는지 알아내기 전까진 한시도 마음의 평온을 찾을 수가 없었어요.
그리고 왕비는 새하얀 비단으로 셔츠 일곱 개도 만들었어요.
왜냐면 자신의 엄마인 마녀에게서 마법을 배웠기 때문이에요.
그녀는 셔츠 안에 주술도 같이 짜 집어넣었어요.
왕이 사냥을 하러 나간 사이, 왕비가 작은 셔츠들을 들고서 숲으로 향했어요. 물론 공(실 뭉치?)이 그녀에게 길을 알려주었지요.
멀리서 누가 오는 모습을 본 아이들은 사랑하는 아빠가 오는 거라 생각하고서 기쁨에 겨워 아빠하고 부르며 달려왔어요.
바로 그때 왕비가 그들 한 명 한 명에게 작은 셔츠를 하나씩 던졌어요.
그 셔츠가 그들의 몸에 가 닿자마자 그들이 백조로 변해버렸어요.
그들이 숲 너머로 푸드덕 거리며 날아갔답니다.
왕비는 아주 만족해하며 집으로 돌아왔어요. 자신의 의붓자식(친자식이 아닌 자녀들)들을 모두다 제거한 거라 믿었기 때문이지요.
하지만 오빠들과 같이 달려 나가지 않았던 소녀에 대해서는 왕비가 까맣게 잊고 말았어요.
다음날 왕이 자신의 아이들을 보러 방문했어요. 하지만 막내딸 하나만 제외하고 아무도 만날 수 없었지요.
“오빠들은 다 어디 갔니?”라며 왕이 물었어요. 
“아아, 사랑하는 아빠.”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “오빠들은 가버렸어요, 저만 남겨두고요!”
그러면서 그녀는 아빠에게 자신의 방 창문을 통해 봤다면서, 어떻게 오빠들이 백조의 모습을 하고서 숲 저 너머로 날아간 건지를 알려드렸어요.
그녀는 또한 아빠에게 깃털들도 보여주었어요. 오빠들이 날아가며 안마당에 떨구고 간 걸 그녀가 주운 거였어요.
왕은 슬펐어요. 하지만 이게 다 왕비의 사악한 짓거리란 건 정말이지 꿈도 꾸지 못했어요.
소녀만 혼자 남겨두기가 두려워진 아빠가 그녀를 데리고 가려고 했어요.
하지만 그녀는 새엄마나 너무너무 무서웠어요. 그래서 아빠인 왕에게는 오늘 밤 하루만 더 숲속 성채에 묵게 해달며 간청했어요.
불쌍한 소녀는 생각했어요.
“여기 더 있음 안 돼. 그러니 오빠들을 찾아 떠나야 해.”
밤이 되자, 그녀는 달아나 곧장 숲 속 더 깊숙이 들어갔어요.
그녀는 온 밤을 계속 걷고 또 걸었어요. 다음 날도 쉬지 않고 걸었어요.
그러다 완전히 지쳐 더는 더 걸어갈 수 없게 되었지요.
그때 숲의 오두막 하나가 눈에 들어왔어요.
그녀가 들어가니 방에 여섯 개의 작은 침대들이 보였어요. 하지만 그녀는 감히 그 침대 중 하나에 누울 생각을 못 했어요.
그래서 침대 밑으로 기어들어가 딱딱한 바닥 위에 등을 대곤 거기서 밤을 지새우기로 작정했어요. 
하지만 그녀는 해질 녘에 푸드덕 소리와 함께 여섯 마리의 백조들이 날아오고 있는 게 창문을 통해 보였어요.
그들이 땅에 착지해 서로에게 바람을 날리자, 순식간에 모든 깃털들이 뿜어져 나오더니 마치 셔츠를 벗듯 그들의 백조 피부가 벗겨졌어요.
그때 그들을 쳐다보던 처녀가 그게 자신의 오빠들이란 걸 깨닫곤 기뻐하며 침대 아래서 기어 나왔답니다.
오빠들도 막내를 본 게 너무도 기뻤어요.
하지만 그들의 즐거움은 오래가지 못했어요.
“어서 여기를 피해.”라며 오빠들이 그녀에게 말했어요. “여긴 도둑들의 소굴이야. 그들이 돌아와 너를 보게 되면 당장 죽이려 들 거야.”
“오빠들이 나를 구해주면 되잖아?”라며 막내가 물었어요.
“아니.”라며 그들이 대답했어요. “우린 매일 저녁 15분 동안만 백조의 피부를 벗고 인간의 형상(모습)을 할 수 있어. 그 나머진 시간엔 우린 그냥 백조들인 거야.”
막내가 울며 말했어요.
“오빠들이 다시 자유로울 순 없는 거야?”
“아아, 그래.”라며 오빠들이 대답했어요. “방법이 하나 있긴 한데 너무 힘들어! 6년 동안 네가 한 마디도 해선 안 되고 웃음소리도 한 번 내선 안 돼, 그리고 그 6년 동안 넌 우리를 위해 ‘별꽃’(밭이나 길가에서 자라는 식물. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/gPuYBZ ) 여섯 벌의 작은 셔츠를 만들어야해. 그사이에 내 입에서 말 한 마디라도 새어나오는 날에는 모든 노력이 헛수고가 되고 만단다.”
오빠들이 이렇게 말하며 벌써 15분이 흘러가버렸고, 그 바람에 오빠들은 다시 백조로 변해 창밖으로 날아가 버렸어요.
하지만 그 처녀는 오빠들을 구해내리라 다짐하고 또 다짐했어요. 비록 자신의 목숨을 받치는 한이 있더라도요.
그녀는 그 오두막을 나와 숲 한복판으로 들어가 어느 나무 위에 앉아 그날 밤을 보냈어요.
다음날 그녀는 밖으로 나와 별꽃들을 꺾어와 정말 셔츠를 만들기 시작했어요.
그녀는 어느 누구에게 단 한 마디도 하지 않았어요. 그리고 웃으려고도 하지 않았지요.
그녀는 거기 앉아 자신의 일에 전념하는 거 외엔 이체 관심을 기울이지 않았어요.
벌써 오랜 시간이 흘러갔어요.
그러던 어느 날 그 나라의 왕이 숲으로 사냥을 나왔는데, 그의 부하들인 사냥꾼들이 지나가다 나무 위에 앉아 있는 처녀를 보고 말았어요.
그들이 그녀에게 소리치며 말했어요.
“당신 누구요?”
하지만 그녀는 아무런 대답을 하지 않았어요.
“이리 내려와 보시오.”라며 그들이 말했어요. “우린 당신에게 어떤 해코지도 하지 않을 거요.”
그녀는 다만 거절의 의미로 고개만 가로질러 보일 뿐이었어요.
그들이 계속 질문공세를 하자, 그녀가 황금 목걸이를 벗어 아래로 던져주었어요. 그거면 그들이 가리라 생각했지요.
하지만 그들은 멈추질 않았어요. 
그런 다음 그녀가 허리띠를 그들에게 던져주었어요.
하지만 그 걸로도 목적을 달성할 수 없었어요.
그녀는 양말을 벗어 아래로 던져주었고, 차츰 이런식으로 그녀가 입고 있던 옷들을 하나 둘씩 아래로 던져준 나머지, 그녀는 결국 ‘슈미즈 드레스’(원피스. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/CyTm7L )외엔 입고 있는 옷이 하나도 없게 되었어요.
하지만 사냥꾼들은 거기서 그치지 않고 나무를 기어 올라가 그녀를 아래로 내린 다음 왕 앞에 데리고 갔어요.
왕이 물었어요.
“당신은 누구요? 누구신데 나무 위에 계셨던 거요?”
하지만 여인은 아무런 대답이 없었어요.
그래서 왕은 자신이 알고 있던 모든 나라의 언어로 같은 질문을 해보았지만, 그녀는 여전히 꿀 먹은 벙어리였어요.
하지만 그녀가 너무도 눈부시게 아름다웠기에, 왕의 심장이 감동을 받아버렸어요.
왕은 그녀에게 반해버리고 말았어요.
왕이 자신의 망토(=외투)를 벗어 그녀에게 입히곤 그녀를 자신의 말에 태우고 자신은 그 뒤에 타고(하나의 말에 같이 탔다는 얘기임^^) 궁궐로 돌아왔어요.
그런 다음 왕은 그녀가 훌륭한 옷들을 입을 수 있게 해주었어요.
아름다운 옷을 입은 그녀는 정말이지 한 떨기 꽃처럼 환하게 빛났답니다. 세상의 그 어떤 말로도 그녀의 아름다움을 다 표현할 수 없었지요.
왕은 밥을 먹을 때도 그녀를 옆자리에 앉혔어요.
그녀의 기품 있는 태도와 예의바름에 기분이 좋아진 왕이 말했어요.
“이 여자와 결혼하리라. 그녀 외엔 이 세상 누구와도 결혼하지 않으리라.”
며칠 후 그는 그녀와 백년가약을 맺었어요.
하지만 왕에겐, 이 결혼을 몹시도 못마땅해 하며 어린 왕비를 헐뜯기에 바쁜 사악한 엄마(진짜 엄마가 아니라 왕의 새엄마임)가 있었어요.
“걔가 누군데,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “어디서 굴러먹다 왔는지 말도 못하는 애와 뭐가 어쩌고 어째? 그녀는 왕비의 재목이 아니다!”
1년이 지나, 그 어린 왕비가 첫째 아이를 출산했어요. 
그러자 노파(왕의 사악한 새엄마)가 아이를 데려가 버렸어요. 그러면서 자고 있는 왕비의 입언저리에 붉은 과즙을 문대고(비비고) 갔어요.
그런 다음 노파는 왕에게 가 왕비가 애기를 먹었다 고발했어요.
왕은 그 말을 믿지 않으려 들었지요. 그래서 누구든 그녀에게 손 끝 하나 댈 수 없다 엄명을 내렸지요.
하지만 왕비는 셔츠 만들기를 계속하는 거 외에는 그 무엇에도 한 눈을 팔지 않았어요. 
그 다음 해에도, 왕비는 아름다운 아들을 다시 출산했어요.
흉악한 새엄마(왕의 새엄마)가 똑같은 음모(아이를 납치하고 왕비의 입언저리에 붉은 과즙을 문댐)를 꾸몄지만, 왕은 왕비에 대한 신뢰를 저버리지 않고 말했어요.
“그녀는 누구보다 경건하며 착하다. 만약 벙어리만 아니었더라도 자신을 방어할 수 있었을 게다. 언젠가 사람들이 그녀의 순결함을 알게 될 날이 오리라.”
하지만 노파(왕의 새엄마)가 세 번째로 태어난 아기까지 훔쳐 빼돌리고 왕비를 고발하자, 말도 못하는 왕비였지만 왕으로서도 더는 보호할 수 없어 재판정에 세울 수밖엔 도리가 없었어요.
결국 왕비는 화형을 선고받았어요.
화형식 날이 바로, 그녀가 6년 동안 말하지도 웃지도 못했던 기간의 마지막 날이었지요.
그녀가 사랑하는 오빠들을 마법의 힘에서 구하는 날이었어요.
여섯 개의 셔츠들이 준비되었어요. 하지만 여섯 번째 셔츠의 왼쪽 소매(왼팔 부분과 몸통 부분을 꿰매는 옷의 부분)가 아직 덜 마무리된 상태였어요.
그리하여 그녀는 화형식 장으로 끌려갈 때까지도 팔에 그 셔츠들을 걸치고 갔어요.
그녀가 높은 곳에 올라서고 불이 막 붙여지려는 찰나에, 그녀가 돌아보니 공중에서 여섯 마리의 백조들이 그녀에게로 날아오고 있었어요. 
구출이 가까워짐을 보는 그녀의 심장을 기쁨으로 마구 고동쳤어요.
백조들이 공기를 가르며 그녀에게로 가더니 내려앉았어요.
그래서 그녀는 셔츠들을 그들에게 던져줄 수 있었어요.
그 셔츠들이 그들에게 가 닿자 백조의 피부들이 떨어져나가고 오빠들이 원기 왕성하고 잘생긴 본래 인간의 모습으로 그녀 앞에 서 있었지요.  
다만 막내오빠(여섯째)의 왼팔 소매 부분이 완성이 안 되었던지라, 막내오빠만은 백조의 왼쪽 날개를 그대로 하고 있어야했어요.
그들은 포옹하며 서로 키스를 해주었어요. 
왕비가 왕에게로 갔어요. 왕은 이 광경에 크게 감동한 상태였어요.
왕비가 말을 하기 시작했어요.
“사랑하는 남편이시어, 저는 이제 말 할 수 있게 되었나이다, 고로 제가 결백하고 무고(남을 허위로 고발함)를 당한 것임을 알려드리는 바입니다.”
왕비는 노파(왕의 새엄마)가 자신의 세 아이들을 데려가 숨긴 일의 죄상을 죄다 아뢰었어요.
숨진 줄 알았던 세 아이들이 나타나자 왕은 너무도 기뻐, 사악한 새엄마를 왕비 대신 화형에 처하란 명령을 내렸어요.
그리하여 새엄마는 불에 타 재로 변해버렸답니다.
하지만 왕과 왕비는, 왕비의 여섯 오빠들과 함께 오랜 세월 행복하고 평안하게 잘 살았답니다.  

(동화 끝)

동화 「여섯 마리 백조」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「여섯 마리 백조」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter49.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



50. 잠자는 숲속의 미녀 (그림형제 버전)(원래제목: 들장미 공주)


■ 미리 알림

‘그림 형제’의 『동화집』에서 「잠자는 숲속의 미녀」를 한 번 해석해보겠습니다. 원래 제목은 「들장미 공주」지만, 「잠자는 숲속의 미녀」라는 제목이 더 유명해 제목으로 사용했습니다.


(분문 시작)


잠자는 숲속의 미녀 (그림형제 버전)(원래제목: 들장미 공주)

옛날 옛날 아주 오랜 옛날에 이렇게 매일 말하시는 왕과 왕비가 살고 계셨어요.
“아, 애가 있었음!”
하지만 그들은 아기를 가지지 못했죠.
그러다 우연히 한 번은 왕비께서 목욕을 하시는데, 개구리 한 마리가 물에서 바닥으로 기어 나오더니 이렇게 말하는 거예요.
“당신의 바람은 이루어지실 거예요. 1년이 가기 전, 당신은 딸을 가지게 되실 거예요.”
개구리가 했던 말은 실현되었어요.
왕비께서 너무도 예쁘장한 아기 공주님을 나으셔서 왕께서 기쁨을 주체하실 수가 없으셨을 지경이에요. 그래서 왕께선 큰 연회를 열도록 명하셨어요.
왕은 친척들뿐만 아니라 친구와 지인들, 그리고 마녀(원문→여자 주술사)들도 또한 와서 우리 딸아이에게 친절한 호의를 베풀어달라고 초청하였어요.
그의 왕국에는 13명의 마녀들이 살았는데요, 어머나 그들에게 식사그릇으로 내놓을 황금 접시가 12개뿐이었던지라 마녀들 중 한 명은 부르지 않고 그냥 집에 남았어요.
연회는 온갖 종류의 볼거리와 함께 성대하게 치러졌어요.
연회가 끝나갈 무렵 마녀들이 자신들의 마법으로 아가에게 선물을 주었답니다. 
첫 번째 마녀는 미덕을 주었고, 두 번째 마녀는 더없는 아름다움을 주었고, 세 번째 마녀는 부(=부자)를 주며 곧 이 애가 세상에서 바라는 건 전부다 이루어질 거라 말했어요.
12번째 마녀가 막 마법을 걸려는데, 별안간 초대받지 못한 13번째 마녀가 입장했어요.
그녀는 자기를 초대해주지 않았다는 사실에 길길이 분개했어요, 그래서 좋다 말다 인사말도 없이, 연회장에 있던 그 어떤 다른 사람에게도 눈길 한 번 주지 않고서, 큰 소리로 이렇게 외쳤어요.
“왕의 딸은 열다섯 살이 되는 해에 ‘물레 가락’(바늘. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/NhoZQ6 )에 찔려 죽고 말 것이다.”
그러곤 그 마녀는 한 마디 말도 업이 뒤돌아서 가버렸어요.
모두들 이 광경에 경악하고 있는데, 아직 마법을 말하지 않고 있던 12번째 마녀가 앞으로 나섰어요. 그녀는 사악한 주문을 없앨 순 없었지만 적어도 누그러뜨릴 순 있었어요.
그래서 12번째 마녀가 말했어요.
“죽지 안태, 다만 공주는 백 년 동안 깊은 잠에 빠질 것예요.”
자신의 소중한 딸아이를 불행으로부터 막기 위해 왕은 즉시 명령을 내려 왕국에 있는 모든 물레 가락을 모조리 불태워버리게 했어요.  
그러는 사이 마녀들의 선물들은 어린 공주에게 착착 실행되어, 그녀는 너무도 아름답고 정숙하며 착한 마음씨를 지니고 현명한 아가씨가 되어 그녀를 보게 되는 모든 이들이 사랑에 빠지고 말 정도였어요. 
그러다 우연히도 그녀가 15살이 되는 바로 그 날이 되었어요.
왕과 왕비께서는 외출 중이셨고요, 소녀만 궁전에 홀로 나아 있었더랬죠.
그래서 그녀는 궁전구석구석을 돌아다니며 방들이며 침실들을 보고 싶은 대로 들여다보았어요. 그러다 마침내 오래된 탑에도 도착하게 되었어요.
그녀가 좁고 구불구불한 계단을 올라가니 자그마한 문이 하나 나왔어요.
녹이 쓴 열쇠로 잠겨져 있는 문이었어요. 그래서 그녀가 그걸 돌리자 문이 벌컹하고 열렸어요.
그 작은 방 안에 어느 노파 한 명이 ‘물레 가락’(바늘. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/NhoZQ6 ) 하나로 바쁘게 실을 잣으며 앉아 있었어요. 
“안녕하세요, 노부인님,”라며 공주님이 말했어요. “거기서 무얼 하시고 계세요?”
“실을 잣고 있지.”라며 그 노파가 고개를 끄떡이며 말했어요. 
“그게 뭐기에 덜걱덜걱 소리를 내며 이렇게도 유쾌하게 돌아가고 있나요?”라며 소녀가 말했어요. 
그래서 소녀도 물레 가락(바늘)을 잡아 실을 잣아보고 싶었어요.
하지만 소녀의 손이 물레 가락에 닿자마자 13번째 마녀의 마법이 이루어질 때가 때마침 되어 소녀는 물레 가락에 손가락이 찔리고 말았어요.  
바늘에 찔리자마자 즉시 그녀는 거기 옆에 있던 침대 위로 쓰러져 깊은 잠이 들고 말았어요.
이와 함께 잠이 온 궁전을 덮쳤어요.
막 궁전에 도착한 왕과 왕비도 큰 홀로 들어서자마자 잠이 들기 시작했고, 그들과 함께 궁전에 있던 모두가 잠이 들기 시작했어요.
말들도 역시 마구간에서 잠이 들었고요, 마당에 이던 개들이랑, 지붕에 있던 비둘기들도, 벽에 붙어 있던 파리들도, 심지어 화덕(화로) 위에서 이글이글 타오르든 불길조차도 그 순간 잠잠해지며 잠이 들었어요. 구워지고 있던 고기들도 지글지글 타다말고 멈췄고요, 심부름을 까먹고 도망치려던 ‘부엌방 도우미 소년’의 머리를 한 움큼 막 움켜쥐려던 요리사도 그대로 잠이 들고 말았어요.
바람들도 잠잠해져 성 앞에 있는 나무들에 붙은 어떤 나뭇잎 하나도 다신 살랑이지 않았어요.
그러자 성 둘레로 가시나무 울타리가 자라나기 시작해 매년 자꾸자꾸 높아져 마침내는 성을 통째로 완전히 가두고 말았어요. 그래서 성의 아무것도 보이지 않고, 지붕 위에 달려 있던 깃발조차도 밖에선 보이지 않았어요.
하지만 사랑스럽게 잠이 든 ‘잠자는 숲속의 미녀’(원문→들장미 공주) 이야기는 온 나로 퍼져 이따금 이웃나라의 왕자님들이 와 가시나무 울타리를 통해 성까지 가보려고 노력했어요.
하지만 그들은 그게 불가능하다는 것만 알 뿐이었답니다. 왜냐면 가시나무들이 마치 살아 있는 손들처럼 재빨리 사람들을 가두는 바람에 젊은이들은 안에 갇혀 오도 가도 못하고서 비참한 죽음을 맞이해야했거든요.
오래고 오랜 세월이 흐른 후, 왕자님 한 분이 이 나라에 들렀다 한 노인으로부터 가시나무 울타리에 관한 얘기를 전해 들었어요.
그 얘기는 들장미 공주라 이름 붙여진 잠자는 숲속의 미녀 한 분이 성 안에서 백 년 동안이나 잠들어 계시다는 이야기였어요. 그녀와 함께 왕과 왕비 그리고 온 궁정이 잠들어 있다는 거예요.
왕자님도 역시 자신의 할아버지로부터, 많은 왕자들이 벌써 가 가시나무 울타리를 뚫고 성에 다다르려 애써보았지만 가시나무 울타리 안에 갇혀 옴짝달싹 못하는 애처로운 죽음을 맞이했었다는 얘기를 들었었어요.
그러자 젊은이가 말했어요.
“난 두렵지 않다. 내가 가서 그 잠자는 숲속의 미녀를 만나보겠다.”
노인은 그러지 말라고 설득해보았지만 왕자님은 듣지 않으셨어요.
때마침 그때가 백 년이 막 지나간 때라, 들장미 공주가 다시 깨어나기로 정해진 날이었어요.
그래서 왕자님이 가시나무 울타리 가까이로 가보니, 가시나무는 온데간데없고 크고 아름다운 꽃들만 조화롭게 서로 서로 붙어 있었어요.
그 꽃들은 왕자님이 손끝하나 다치지 않게 지나갈 수 있게 길을 열어주고는 왕자님이 지나가자 다시 가시나무처럼 뒤에서 길을 닫아주었어요.
성의 안뜰에 들어서니 말들이며 점박이 사냥개들이 누워 잠들어 있는 모습이며, 지붕 위에 앉은 비둘기들이 고개를 자신들의 날갯죽지 안에 파묻고서 잠들어 있는 모습이 보였어요.
그리고 왕자님이 궁전 안으로 들어서자, 파리들은 벽 위에 붙어 잠자고 있었고, 부엌에 있던 요리사는 여전히 부엌방 심부름꾼 소년의 손을 움켜쥔 채 잠들어 있었고, 시녀는 옆에 검은 암탉을 앉혀놓고 막 털을 뽑으려고 하던 예전 모습 그대로 잠들어 있었어요.
왕자님이 좀 더 들어가자 큰 홀이 나왔는데, 궁전 안 모든 사람들이 왕관을 쓴 왕과 왕비 옆에서 잠들어 있었어요.
그래서 왕자님이 좀 더 더 깊이 들어가 보니, 숨소리도 들릴 만큼 모든 게 고요했어요.
그러다 마침내 왕자님이 그 탑에 도착해서 들장미 공주가가 잠들어 있는 그 작은 방으로 통하는 문을 열었어요.
거기에 그녀가 누어있었는데, 너무도 아름다워 그녀에게서 도저히 눈을 뗄 수가 없을 정도였어요. 그래서 왕자님은 허리를 굽혀 그녀에서 키스 했어요. 
왕자님이 그녀에게 키스를 하자마자 들장미 공주가 눈을 뜨며 잠에서 깨어나며 아주 다정한 눈빛으로 왕자님을 바라보았어요.
그런 다음 왕자님과 공주님은 함께 아래로 내려왔어요.
그와 함께 왕도 깨어나시고 왕비님도 깨어나고 온 궁전 안에 있던 사람들이 어리둥절해하며 서로를 쳐다보며 잠에서 깨어났어요.
말들이 안뜰에서 일어나며 연신 고개를 푸드덕푸드덕 흔들었고요, 사냥개들이 깡충깡충 뛰며 꼬리를 연신 흔들어보였고요, 지붕 위에 있던 비둘기들이 날갯죽지에서 고개를 막 뽑아들곤 주변을 이러 저리 돌아보더니 푸드덕 하늘로 날아올랐어요, 벽 위에 붙어있던 파리들이 다시 기어갔고요, 부엌에 있던 불길이 다시 깜박깜박 피어오르며 고기를 요리하기 시작하면서 요리사가 고기를 반대쪽으로 뒤집자 지글지글 소리를 내며 고기가 다시 구워졌어요, 그리고 요리사에게 귀 한쪽을 붙잡힌 부엌방 심부름꾼 소년은 “아파요!”라는 비명을 질렀고요, 시녀가 암탉의 털을 뽑자 암탉이 “꼬꼬댁!” 거리기 시작했어요.
그런 다음 왕자님과 들장미 공주의 결혼식이 성대한 축하행사와 함께 거행되었고요, 사람들은 오래도록 만족해하며 행복하게 잘 살았답니다.

(끝)

동화 「잠자는 숲속의 미녀(원래제목: 들장미 공주)」(그림형제 버전)의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「잠자는 숲속의 미녀(원래제목: 들장미 공주)」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter50.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



51. 새가 주운 아이 (푼데포겔)
(독일어원문→푼데포겔. 푼데=발견. 포겔=‘새 또는 사람’)





옛날에 ‘삼림 감독관’(삼림=산) 하나가 숲으로 사냥을 하러 갔다, 아기가 내는 듯한 비명 소리를 듣게 되었어요.
그가 소리를 따라 가다보니 마침내 큰 나무 한 그루가 나왔어요. 그 나무 꼭대기에 어린 아기가 앉아 있었어요.
엄마가 나무 아래서 조는 사이 새가 아기를 먹잇감으로 여기고 낚아채 거기 내려놓은 거 같았어요. 
‘삼림 감독관’이 기어 올라가 그 아이를 다시 데리고 내려왔어요.
그가 속으로 생각했어요.
‘집에 데려가, 우리 딸 ‘리나’(여자이름)와 함께 키워야겠다.‘
그가 아기를 집으로 데려갔어요.
그리하여 두 아이는 함께 자라게 되었답니다.
하지만 한 아이는 나무 위에서 발견했다고 해서 ’새가 주운 아이‘(독일어원문→푼데포겔. 푼데=발견. 포겔=‘새 또는 사람’)라 불렀어요. 어쨌건 새가 데려간 건 맞으니까요.
’새가 주운 아이‘와 ’리나‘는 서로를 무척이나 사랑해 한시라도 안 보면 슬퍼질 정도였답니다. 
하지만 ‘삼림 감독관’ 네 집에는 늙은 요리사가 한 명 있었는데요.
어느 날 저녁에 물통 두 개를 들고 나가더니 물을 떠오기 시작하지 뭐예요. 
샘에서 물을 한 번 떠오고 마는 것이 아니라 수없이 왔다 갔다 하는 거예요. 
이것을 본 리나가 말했어요.
“에계계, 산나 아줌마, 물을 왜 이렇게나 많이 담아요?” 
“누구에게도 말하지 않겠다 약속해주면 이유를 말해주마.”
그래서 리나가 절대 안 말하겠다고, 누구에게도 말해주지 않겠다고 말했어요. 
그러자 요리사가 말했어요.
“내일 아침 일찍, ‘삼림 감독관’님이 사냥을 나가고 나면, 내가 이 물을 끓일 거다. 팔팔 끓이고 나면 ‘새가 주운 아이’를 이 안에 넣고 삶을 참이란다.”
때마침 다음날 새벽에 ‘삼림 감독관’이 일어나 사냥을 나가셨어요.
아빠가 나갈 때 아이들은 여전히 침대에 누워 있었어요.
그때 리나가 ‘새가 주운 아이’에게 말했어요.
“네가 나를 떠나지 않음, 나도 너를 떠나지 않을 게.”
‘새가 주운 아이’가 말했어요.
“그럴게, 지금도 너를 떠나지 않을 거고, 앞으로도 너를 떠나지 않을 테야.”
그러자 리나가 말했어요.
“그럼 말해줄게. 어젯밤에 산나 아줌마가 샘에서 물을 엄청 떠다 놨어. 그래서 왜 그러시냐고 내가 물어봤더니, 내가 누구에게도 말하지 않으면 이유를 알려주겠다고 해서, 내가 절대 그러지 않겠다고 약속했더니, 내일 아침 일찍 아빠가 사냥을 나가시고 나면, 물을 팔팔 끓여 그 안에 너를 넣고 삶겠데. 그러니 우리 어서 일어나 옷을 입고 함께 여길 벗어나자.”
그리하여 두 아이는 자리에서 일어나 재빨리 옷을 챙겨 입은 다음 달아났어요.
솥의 물이 팔팔 끓기 시작하자, 요리사가 ‘새가 주운 아이’를 데려와 솥 안에 던져넣으려고 침실로 들어갔어요.
하지만 그녀가 방에 들어섰을 땐 이미 아이 둘 다 달아난 뒤였지요.
그러자 그녀가 벌컥 겁이 나 속으로 말했어요.
“가만있어봐, ‘삼림 감독관’이 돌아와 아이들이 없어진 사실을 알면 그땐 내가 무슨 말을 해야 되는 거야? 안되겠다, 빨리 아이들을 뒤쫓아 가 잡아오게 해야겠다.”
그래서 요리사는 하인 셋을 보내 뒤쫓게 했어요.
하인들은 아이들을 따라잡기 위해 달렸지요.
하지만 숲 바깥에 앉아 있던 아이들은 하인 셋이 자신들을 뒤쫓아 달려오는 걸 보았어요.
리나가 ‘새가 주운 아이’에게 말했어요.
“절대 나를 떠나지 마, 그럼 나도 너를 절대 떠나지 않을게.”
‘새가 주운 아이’도 말했어요.
“지금도 그리고 앞으로도 절대 너를 떠나지 않을게.”
그러자 리나가 말했어요.
“그럼 넌 장미 나무 한 그루가 돼, 나는 그 장미 나무에 핀 장미가 될게.”
하인 셋이 숲에 도착했을 때 보니 거기엔 아무도 없고 그저 장미 나무 한 그루와 거기에 핀 장미 한 송이뿐이었어요. 아이들은 온데간데없었죠.
하인들이 말했어요.
“뭐야, 아무도 없잖아.”
하인들이 집으로 돌아가 요리사에게 말했어요.
“숲에 갔더니, 장미 한 송이가 피어 있는 작은 장미 나무 하나 밖에 없었어요.”
그러자 늙은 요리사가 벌컥 화를 내며 말했어요.
“이 바보야, 그럼 이 둘 보곤 그 장미 나무를 베게 하고, 장미는 따서라도 가지고 집에 돌아왔어야지, 어서가, 다시 가보지 못해.” 
그리하여 하인들이 다시 밖으로 나와 두 번째 추격전을 시작했어요.
하지만 아이들은 저 멀리서 오고 있는 하인들의 모습을 보았지요.
그러자 리나가 말했어요.
“‘새가 주운 아이’야, 절대 나를 떠나지 마, 그럼 나도 너를 절대 떠나지 않을게.”
‘새가 주운 아이’가 말했어요.
“지금도 그리고 앞으로도 절대 떠나지 않을게.”
리나가 말했어요.
“그럼 넌 교회가 돼, 나는 그 교회 안에 있는 ‘샹들리에’(호화로운 전등. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/o4geZx )가 될게.”
그리하여 하인 셋이 도착했을 땐, 교회 하나와 교회 안의 샹들리에 외엔 아무것도 없었어요. 
이번에도 하인들은 서로 말했어요.
“우리가 여기 뭐 하러 온 거야, 그냥 집으로 돌아가자.”
하인들이 집에 도착했을 때, 그 요리사는 아이들을 찾았는지를 물었어요.
그래서 하인들이 말했어요.
“아뇨. 교회 하나와 그 안에 샹들리에 하나 있는 거 외엔 아무것도 찾지 못했어요.”
그러자 그 요리사가 벌컥 화를 내며 그들을 나무랐어요.
“이 띨띨이들아(바도들아)! 왜, 그 교회를 산산조각내고 그 샹들리에를 집으로 가져올 생각들을 못해?”
이리하여 이번엔 늙은 요리사가 직접 두 발로 나섰어요.
요리사는 하인 셋과 함께 아이들에 대한 추격을 시작했어요.
하지만 아이들은 저 멀리에서 하인들이 다시 오고 있는 모습을 보았지요. 이번엔 요리사까지 오리처럼 뒤뚱뒤뚱 걸어오는 게 보였어요.
그때 리나가 말했어요.
“‘새가 주운 아이’(원문→푼데포겔)야, 나를 절대 떠나지마, 그럼 나도 너를 절대 떠나지 않을게.”
그러자 ‘새가 주운 아이’가 말했어요.
“지금도 그리고 앞으로도 절대 떠나지 않을게.”
리나(삼림 감독관의 딸)가 말했어요.
“연못이 되렴, 그럼 난 그 위에 뜬 오리가 될게.”
하지만 요리사가 거기 도착해, 새로 생긴 그 연못을 보자마자 다 마셔버릴 기세로 벌컥벌컥 들이키기 시작했어요.
하지만 오리(리나가 변신한 오리)는 재빨리 요리사(여자)에게 헤엄쳐가 자신(오리)의 주둥이로 요리사의 머리채를 확 붙잡아 물속으로 잡아당겼어요.
그 바람에 늙은 마녀(요리사의 정체)는 물에 빠져 죽고 말았답니다.
그리하여 아이들은 진심으로 기뻐하며 함께 집으로 돌아올 수 있었어요.
만약 그 애들이 죽지 않았다면, 여전히 이 세상 어딘가에서 우릴 지켜보고 있을 거예요.

(동화 끝)

동화 「새가 주운 아이」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「새가 주운 아이」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter51.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



52. 개똥지빠귀 수염 왕
(개똥지빠귀(=참새) 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/JKYGRG )





넋이 나갈 정도로 아름답지만 너무 거만하고 도도해 구혼자들이 전혀 눈에 차지 않던 딸을 둔 왕이 살고 있었어요.
그녀는 차례차례 남자들을 차 버렸어요, 게다가 그들을 놀리기까지 했죠.
한번은 왕이 큰 잔치를 열고, 멀고 가까운 곳에 사는 결혼하고 싶어 하는 모든 젊은이들을 거기로 초대했어요.
그들은 자신들의 계급과 지위에 맞게 줄들을 섰어요.
첫 번째 줄엔 왕들이 서고, 다음 줄엔 황태자들이 서고, 그 다음 줄엔 왕자들이 서고, 그 다음엔 백자들이, 그 다음엔 남작들이, 그 다음엔 신사계급 분들이 줄을 섰어요.
그런 다음 공주님이 군중(사람들)을 헤치며 입장하셨어요.
그녀는 그 모든 사람들을 갖가지 이유를 들며 반대했어요.
너무 뚱뚱한 자에겐,
“혹시, 포도주 통이신가요?”라고 말했고,
너무 키가 큰 사람에겐,
“너무 기다랗고 홀쭉하잖아요.”라고 말했고,
너무 키가 작은 사람에겐,
“정말 땅딸막하시군요.”라고 말했고,
얼굴이 너무 창백한 사람에겐,
“죽음처럼 창백하시군요.”라고 말했고,
얼굴혈색이 붉은 사람에겐,
“싸움닭 같으세요.”라고 말했고,
허리가 굽은 사람에겐,
“난로 뒤에서 말라 휘어진 땔나무 같으시군요.”라고 말을 했지요.  
그런 식으로 모두에게 퇴짜를 놓았지만, 그래도 공주님은 단연코 줄 가장 앞에 서 계시던 착한 왕의 갈고리처럼 휘어진 턱을 놀리는 재미가 듬뿍 빠졌답니다.
“어머머,”라며 그녀가 웃으며 소리쳤어요. “전하의 턱이 마치 ‘개똥지빠귀’(개똥지빠귀(=참새) 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/JKYGRG )의 ‘부리’(=주둥이) 같으세요!”
그때부터 그 지체 높으신 왕은 ‘개똥지빠귀 수염 왕’이라 불리게 되었답니다.
하지만 나이 많으신 왕(공주의 아빠)은, 자신의 딸내미가 사람들을 놀리기만 하고 갖가지 이유를 들어 구혼자들에게 퇴짜를 놓자, 아주 화가 난 나머지 맹세하고 말았어요.
“성문에 나타나는 첫 번째 거지에게 그녀를 아내로 줘버리겠다.”
그 며칠 후, 바이올린 연주자 한 명이 나타나 성의 창문들 아래서 노래를 부르며 “한품 주십시오.”라며 간청하고 있었어요.
왕이 이 소리를 듣자마자 말했어요.
“그 자를 데려오거라.”
그리하여 바이올린 연주자가 나타났는데, 꼴이 정말 거지 꼴 다름없지 뭐예요.
그래도 그는 왕과 공주님 앞에서 연주를 했어요. 연주가 끝이 나자 그(바이올린 연주자)가 하찮아도 좋으니 선물 하나만 달라고 간청했어요.
왕이 말했어요.
“네 연주가 나를 감복시켰다. 내 그 보답으로 여기 있는 내 딸내미는 네 아내로 줄 것이다.”
공주님이 몸서리를 치셨어요.
하지만 왕은 말했어요.
“난 이미 성문에 나타나는 첫 번째 남자거지에게 내 딸을 주겠다 맹세했다, 이제 그걸 지킬 뿐이다.”
공주가 하는 모든 말들이 다 헛수고가 되었어요.
목사님이 불려나오셨거든요.
그리하여 공주는 이 바이올린 연주자와 이 날 백년가약을 맺게 되었어요.
결혼식이 끝이 나자 왕이 말했어요.
“이제 공주 넌 거지의 아내이다. 그러니 더는 내 궁전에 머물 수 없다. 어서 네 남편을 따라 여길 떠나거라.”
그 남자거지가 그녀의 손을 이끌고 나갔어요.
그리하여 그녀는 그와 함께 걸어야했답니다.
그들이 울창한 숲에 들어서자 그녀가 물었어요.
“이 아름다운 숲은 누구 건가요?” 
“개똥지빠귀 수염 왕의 것이오. 당신이 그를 붙잡았다면(결혼했다면) 지금쯤 이 모두가 당신 것이 되어있을 것을.”
“아, 지지리도 복도 없는 여인아, 어쩌자고 그때 개똥지빠귀 수염 왕님을 잡지 않았니!”
그 후 그들이 목초지(풀밭)를 지나가게 되었어요. 
그러자 그녀가 다시 물었어요.
“이 아름다운 풀밭들이 다 누구 건가요?” 
“개똥지빠귀 수염 왕의 것이오. 당신이 그를 붙잡았다면(결혼했다면) 지금쯤 이 모두가 당신 것이 되어있을 것을.”
“아, 지지리도 복도 없는 여인아, 어쩌자고 그때 개똥지빠귀 수염 왕님을 잡지 않았니!”
“썩 좋게만 들리진 않는 구료.”라며 그 바이올린 연주자가 말했어요. “다른 남자가 남편이었음 하고 바라니. 내가 마음에 차지 않는 게요?”
그들이 마침내 아주 자그마한 오두막집에 도착했어요.
그러자 그녀가 말했어요.
“오 세상에! 엄청 작은 집이네요. 이 끔찍이도 초라해 뵈는(보이는) 헛간은 대체 누구 건가요?”
바이올린 연주자가 대답했어요.
“저긴 나와 당신의 집이자 이제부터 우리가 함께 살아갈 집이오.”
그 낮은 문을 그녀가 간신히 몸을 웅크려가며 들어가더니 말했어요.
“하인들은 어디 있죠?”
“무슨 하인 말이오?”라며 남자거지가 대답했어요. “이제부턴 당신이 원하는 게 있음 모두 당신이 직접 해야 하오. 당장 불이나 지피시오(피우시오). 저녁거리를 요리하려면 물부터 끊여야하니, 난 너무 피곤해서 말이지.”
하지만 우리의 공주님은 불을 지피는(피우는) 방법이나 요리를 하는 법을 전혀 모르시는 걸요. 그래서 남자거지의 손을 빌려야했고 그제야 일이 상당히 진척이 되었어요.
그들이 얼마 안 되는 식사를 마치고 침대에 들었어요.
하자만 그는 공주는 새벽 일찍부터 일어나게 했어요. 집안일을 하게 하려고요. 
며칠간은 이런 식으로 나름 잘 지냈답니다. 
그리고 식료품들이 다 떨어져가는 상황이 발생했지요.
그때 그 남자가 말했어요.
“여보, 여기서 무일푼으로 먹고 마시며 지낼 순 없게 됐소. 당신이 한 번 바구니를 만들어보구려.”
그가 밖으로 나가더니 버드나무 가지들을 상당히 많이 꺾어 집으로 돌아왔어요.
그리하여 그녀는 바구니를 만들기 시작했어요, 하지만 거친 버드나무 가지에 그녀의 곱디고운 손이 부상을 당하고 말았어요.
“허허, 이것도 안 되겠군.”라며 그 남자가 말했어요. “차라리 실을 한 번 만들어보구려. 아마 그거라면 좀 더 수월할(쉬울) 거요.”
그녀는 앉아 실을 만들려고 노력해보았어요, 하지만 딱딱한 실들에 곧 그녀의 고운 손가락들이 베여 피가 뚝뚝 떨어지고 말았어요.
“이런,”라며 그 남자가 말했어요. “당신은 어떤 가사노동하고도 안 맞나 보오. 어렵겠지만 물건을 한 번 팔아보시오. 내가 항아리들과 그릇들을 마련해볼 테니, 당신은 시장에 앉아 그걸 팔아보시구려.”
‘아아,’라며 그녀가 생각했어요. ‘아빠 왕국에서 온 백성이 시장에 들렸다 거기 앉아 물건들을 팔고 있는 나를 보면 얼마나 놀려댈까?’
하지만 쓸모없는 걱정이었죠. 이대로 굶어죽을 순 없으니까요.
첫 장사는 대성공이었어요.
사람들이 너무도 아름답게 생긴 여인이 파는 그릇에 무척이나 만족해했거든요.
그들은 그녀가 말하는 대로 돈을 지불하고 갔어요.
심지어 돈만 건네주고 그릇은 따로 더 파시라며 두고 가기까지 하던 걸요.
그리하여 그 그릇들을 다 팔 때까지 그들은 먹고 살 수 있었답니다.
그런 다음 남편이 새로운 도자기를 많이 사왔어요.
그녀는 이 도자기들을 시장의 길모퉁이에 펼쳐놓고 팔기 시작했어요. 
하지만 장사가 시작되자마자 어느 술 취한 ‘경기병’(가벼운 차림으로 싸우는 기마병) 하나가 시장 모퉁이를 돌다 그만 도자기들 사이로 뛰어들어 모든 도자기들이 수천조각으로 깨어지고 말았어요.
그녀가 울기 시작했어요. 어찌해야할지 너무도 두려웠거든요.
“아아! 이제 어째?”라며 그녀가 울었어요. “남편보고 뭐라고 한담?”
그녀가 집으로 달려가 이 불행을 남편에게 말했어요.
“그래 누가 도자기들을 시장 길모퉁이에 차린단 말이오?”라며 남자가 말했어요. “그만 우시구려. 당신이 평범한 일들과는 맞지 않다는 건 이미 잘 알았으니. 그래서 말인데 내가 오늘 궁전에 갔다 왔는데, 거기서 글쎄 ‘부엌 하녀’를 한 명을 구하지 못하고 있으니 내가 대신 찾아서 데려와 달라더군. 거기서 일하게 되면 공짜로 당신이 먹을 음식쯤은 얻어올 수 있을 게요.”
공주는 이제 ‘부엌 하녀’가 되어 요리사님의 손짓 말 짓에 따라 천한 일들을 하게 되었답니다.
그녀는 양쪽 호주머니에 작은 병을 묶어놓았다가 음식 남는 게 생기면 그 안에 담아 집으로 돌아와 남편과 나눠먹었어요. 그들은 이런 식으로 살았어요.
그러다 우연히 왕의 첫째 아들의 결혼식이 열리게 되었어요.
불쌍한 여인은 위로 올라가 홀의 문 옆에 서선 안을 들여다보았답니다.
어찌나 많은 촛불들이 밝혀져 있던지, 그리고 멋지게 차려입은 사람들이 저마다의 허세와 화려함을 뿜어내며 입장하던지.
그녀는 마음이 답답해 너무도 슬펐어요. 자신을 비천하게 가난한 신분으로 만든 거만함과 도도함을 저주했지요.  
맛있는 음식들이 좋은 향을 풍기며 안으로 운반되고 또 빈 접시들이 밖으로 내보내졌어요.
이따금 하인들이 그녀에게 소량의 음식들을 던져주었고, 그럼 그녀는 자신의 옷소매에 매단 병 안에 그걸 집어넣고 집으로 가져왔답니다.
갑자기 벨벳(짧고 고운 털이 촘촘히 심어진 천. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/jzVONV )와 비단으로 된 옷을 입은 왕자님이 목에 금줄을 여럿 두르고서 입장하셨어요.
그 왕자님은 입장하시다 문 옆에 서 있는 아리따운 여인의 손을 쥐더니 이 여인과 춤을 추겠다고 말씀하셨어요.
하지만 그녀는 거절했어요, 두려움에 움츠려들었기 때문이지요.
왜냐하면 그 왕자님은 자신이 예전에 그토록 비웃으며 퇴짜를 놓았던 ‘개똥지빠귀(=참새) 수염 왕’이었기 때문이에요.
그녀의 노력이 소용이 없었어요.
그가 그녀를 홀로 데리고 갔거든요.
그때 그녀의 호주머니에 매단 끈이 끊어져 병들이 바닥에 떨어져, 수프(고깃국)가 쏟아지고 음식 찌꺼기들이 여기저기 흩어졌어요.
그것을 본 사람들의 웃음소리가 점점 커졌어요.
천 길 낭떠러지로 떨어지기라도 하는 마냥 그녀는 부끄러웠어요.
그녀가 문으로 뛰어가 여기서 달아나려했어요.
하지만 계단위에서 어떤 남자가 그녀를 붙잡더니 데려가려했어요.
그녀가 누군지 쳐다보니 이번에도 그건 ‘개똥지빠귀(=참새) 수염 왕’이셨어요. 
그가 상냥한 말투로 그녀에게 말하네요.
“두려워마오, 나는 지금껏 당신과 초라한 헛간에서 함께 산 ‘바이올린 연주자’요. 나를 속인 건 당신을 너무도 사랑하기 때문이오. 말을 타고서 당신의 도자기들 속으로 뛰어든 ‘경기병’(가벼운 차림으로 싸우는 기마병)도 나였소. 이는 모두 당신의 거만한 콧대를 꺾고, 나를 조롱한(놀린) 무례함에 대해 벌하기 위함이었소.”
그러자 그녀가 엉엉 울며 말했어요.
“제가 나빴어요. 전(저는) 당신의 아내가 될 자격이 없어요.”
하지만 그가 말했어요.
“괜찮소, 과거는 과거일 뿐이오. 지금은 우리의 결혼식을 축하하면 되오.”
그때 대기하고 있던 시녀(궁녀)들이 우르르 몰려나와 그녀에게 이 세상에서 가장 화사한 옷을 입혔어요.
그리고 ‘그녀의 아빠’와 ‘아빠의 궁중(궁전) 사람들’도 나오며 그녀와 ‘개똥지빠귀(=참새) 수염 왕’의 결혼을 진심으로 축하해주었어요.
이리하여 결혼식의 열기는 이제부터 본격적으로 물어 익어가기 시작했답니다.
아이 참, 여러분들이나 저도 거기 있었어야 하는 건데 말이죠~♥.(←원문에 있는 문장임. 제가 임의로 추가한 거 아님. 물론 하트‘~♥’는 제가 임의로 추가했음ㅋㅋ^0^)

(동화 끝)

동화 「개똥지빠귀 수염 왕」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「개똥지빠귀 수염 왕」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter52.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



53. 백설 공주


■ 미리 알림
지금부터 소개해드릴 백설 공주(그림형제)는, 우리들이 알고 있는 디즈니 만화영화의 백설 공주 내용과는 살짝 뉘앙스(분위기)가 다릅니다. 아닌가???#@^$**%
어쨌든, 
샤를 페로(프랑스 작가)의 동화든, 아니면 그림 형제(독일 작가)의 동화든, 이미 백 년 전 책이거니와, 동화의 내용이 우리나라 사람들의 정서(디즈니에서 나온 백설공주 같은 분위기)에 안 맞는 게 많습니다. 
오래전 내용이다 보니 동화라기보다는 성경의 구약성서 느낌(잔인한데 교훈적이고 재밌음)이 많이 납니다.
그래서 처음 이들 동화집을 읽으면 좋고 나쁨을 떠나, 기분이 안 좋아질 수 있습니다. 이 점 주의 바랍니다.


(소설 시작)

동화제목 : 백설 공주(원문→사랑스러운 백설 공주)

(본문시작)

옛날 옛날 아주 옛날 눈송이가 하얀 깃털처럼 하늘에서 내리고 있는 어느 추운 겨울에, 여왕님께서 새까만(검은) 나무틀로 된 창가에 앉아 바느질을 하고 계셨어요. 
바느질을 하시다 여왕님께서 그만 창문 밖에 내리는 눈을 바라보시다 바늘에 손가락이 콕 하고 찔려 눈 위에 세 방울의 피를 흘렸어요.
붉은 피는 새하얀 눈 위에서 더욱 도드라져보였고, 여왕님은 속으로 생각하셨죠.
“눈송이 마냥 새하얗고 핏방울마냥 붉으며 창틀(=나무)마냥 순수한(=검은) 아이를 가졌으면!”
그후, 얼마 되지 않아 여왕님께서는 사랑스런 딸아이를 가지게 되었다. 눈처럼 새하얗고 핏방울처럼 붉으며 칠흑(검정색) 같은 머릿결을 가진 아이였다. 
그래서 모두들 그 애를 백설 공주라 부르게 되었다. 
하지만 그 애가 태어난 날 여왕님께서는 돌아가시게 된다(숨을 거두었다). 
1년 후 왕께서 새 왕비를 얻으셨다. 
그녀는 아름다운 여성이었다. 하지만 너무 거만하고 도도했다. 게다가 그녀는 이 세상 어느 누구든 자신의 미모를 능가하는 꼴을 도저히 볼 수 없었다. 
새 왕비에겐 놀라운 거울이 하나 있었는데, 새 왕비가 그 앞에 서서 자신의 모습을 보면서 이렇게 말을 하면…
“거울아, 거울아, 벽장속에 박힌 거울아, 이 세상에서 누가 가장 예쁘지?”
그러면 거울이 대답하길…
“여왕폐하야 말로 이 세상 어느 누구보다도 아름다우십니다!”
그런 다음에야 새 왕비는 만족했다. 왜냐하면 자신이 봐도 예뻤기 때문이다. 
하지만 백설 공주가 자라면서 점점 더 예뻐져 갔고 7살이 되자 아침 햇살만큼이나 어여뻤을 뿐만 아니라 새 여왕 자신보다 훨씬 더 예뻤다. 
그러던 한 번은 왕비가 거울에게 물었다…
거울아, 거울아, 벽장 속에 박힌 거울아, 이 세상에서 누가 가장 예쁘지?”
그러자 거울이 대답하기를…
“왕비님도 세상 누구 못지않게 예쁘시긴 하지만, 제가 생각하기에는 백설 공주님이 훨씬 더 아름다우신 거 같습니다.”
그 말에 여왕이 충격을 받아 질투심에 얼굴이 노래지고 말았다. 
그 일이 있고서 부터는 백설 공주를 볼 때면 심장이 쿵쾅거리는 게 정말이지 미워 죽을 지경이었다.  
그렇게 잡초(잡초 한 개)마냥 여왕의 마음에서 질투심과 독기가 더 높이 더 높이 자라고 자라나니 단 하루도 조용히 지나가는 날이 없었다. 
여왕이 사냥꾼을 불러 말했다. 
“저 애를 숲으로 데려가, 더 이상 내 눈에 띄게 하지 말거라. 저 애를 죽이고, 그 증거로 저 애의 심○을 가지고 오거라.” (←보셨죠. 그림형제의 동화는 우리나라 사람들의 정서와는 안 맞습니다. 그러니 그냥 이런 동화가 있다는 정도로만 접하시면 좋아요. 모르는 것보단 낫죠~) 
사냥꾼이 그 말에 복종해 백설 공주를 데리고 사라졌다. 
하지만 자신의 칼을 꺼내들고서 백설 공주의 순결한 심장을 막 찌르려는 순간, 백설 공주가 다음과 같이 울면서 말하기 시작했다. 
“아 제발 사냥꾼님, 절 살려주세요! 살려만 주시면 숲으로 도망가 다시는 집으로 돌아오지 않을 게요.”
백설 공주가 너무 예뻤기 때문에 사냥꾼도 연민(불쌍함)의 정을 느끼고 이렇게 말했다. 
“도망가거라. 자, 어서 불쌍한 애야.”
‘아마도 곧 사나운 짐승에게 잡아먹힐 테지.’라며 사냥꾼은 생각했다. 그렇게만 되어준다면 이 예쁜 아이를 직접 죽일 필요는 없게 되기 때문이다.
때마침 어린 수퇘지(멧돼지) 한 마리가 지나가기에 달려들어 찔러 죽인 후 심장을 꺼내 담은 후 여왕에게 가져가 그것이 그 여자아이를 죽인 증거라며 제시했다. 
여왕은 요리사를 시켜 그것에 소금을 치게 했다. 사악한 여왕은 그렇게 그 심장을 먹으며 자신이 지금 백설 공주의 심장을 먹고 있다고 여겼다. (←그림 형제의 글이 우리나라 정서와는 안 맞는 것이 드러나죠.)
이제 불쌍한 백설 공주는 그 큰 숲 속에 혼자 남게 되었다. 너무도 무섭고 떨려서 사그락 사그락 떨어지는 낙엽소리에도 소스라치듯 놀랐고 이제부터 무엇을 어떻게 해야할지 알지 못했다. 
일단 달리기 시작했다. 그러다 날카로운 돌부리에 걸려 넘어지기도 하고 가시에 찔리기도 했고, 가끔씩 무서운 산 짐승들도 지나쳤지만 다행히 백설 공주를 해할 생각은 없어 보였다. 
백설 공주는 거의 저녁이 될 때까지 있는 힘껏 달리고 또 달렸다.  
마침내 자그마한 오두막 한 채가 보여 쉬려고 그 안으로 들어가 보았다. 
그런데 오두막 안에 있는 모든 물건들이 자그마했다. 하지만 무척 깔끔하고 청결했다. 
식탁 위엔 새하얀 보자기가 펼쳐져 있고 그 위엔 7개의 접시와, 각각의 접시들마다 스푼(숟가락) 하나씩 해서 총 7개의 작은 스푼이 놓여 있었다. 
게다가 7개의 작은 나이프(칼)와 포크도 있었고, 작은 머그잔(손잡이 달린 컵)도 7개 있었다.
그리고 벽엔 작은 침대 7개가 나란히 위치해 있었는데, 정말이지 눈송이처럼 새하얀 이불이 덮여있었다.  
백설 공주는 너무 배고프고 목이 말라서 각각의 접시에서 채소와 빵을 조금씩 떼어다 먹고, 각각의 머그잔(손잡이가 달린 컵)에서 포도주를 한 모금씩 마셨어요. 왜냐하면 자기로 인해 누구 한 명이 몽땅 아무것도 못 먹게 되는 경우가 없게 하기 위해서예요. 
그런 다음, 너무 피곤하던 백설 공주가 작은 침대들 중 하나에 몸을 누웠는데 하지만 침대 중 어느 것도 자신의 키에 맞지 않는 거예요, 백설 공주가 너무 긴 경우이거나 아님 침대가 너무 짧았던 거죠, 하지만 7번째 침대가 자신에게 딱 맞는 것을 확인한 백설 공주가 그 침대에서 기도를 드린 후 바로 골아 떨어졌어요.
날은 짙어지고 오두막이 주인들이 돌아올 때가 되었다. 
그들은 산에서 광석을 깨는 일곱 난장이들이었다. 
난장이들이 일곱 개의 촛불을 켰다. 
오두막에 있는 촛불들이 켜지자 그들의 눈에 누군가가 거길 다녀간 흔적들이 보였다. 왜냐하면 평소와 달리 모든 물건들이 제자리에 있지 않았기 때문이었다. 
첫 번째 난장이가 말했어요.
“누가 내 의자에 앉았었나봐?”
두 번째 난장이가 말했어요.
“누가 내 접시에 있던 걸 먹었나봐?”
세 번째 난장이가 말했어요.
“누가 내 빵을 조금 떼어먹은 거 같은데?”
네 번째 난장이가 말했어요.
“누가 내 야채를 먹었나봐?”
다섯 번째 난장이가 말했어요.
“누가 내 포크를 사용한 거 같은데?”
여섯 번째 난장이가 말했어요.
“누가 내 나이프(칼)를 사용했나봐?”
일곱 번째 난장이가 말했어요.
“누가 내 머그잔(손잡이가 달린 컵)에 있던 걸 좀 마신 거 같은데?”
그러다 첫 번째 난장이가 주위를 둘러보다 말고 자신의 침대 위가 살짝 들어간 것을 발견하고 말했다. 
“누가 내 침대에 들어갔었나 봐?”
나머지 난장이들이 모여들며 제각기 소리쳤다. 
“누가 내 침대 위에 누워있는데.”
일곱 번째 난장이만은 자신의 침대를 보고는 백설 공주가 거기에서 다소곳이 누워 잠들어있는 걸 보았다. 
그래서 일곱 번째 난장이가 나머지를 불렀고, 나머지 난장이들이 쿵쾅쿵쾅 모여들더니 깜짝 놀라 탄신을 질렀다. 
그들은 각자 일곱 개의 촛불을 가져다 백설 공주를 비추어보고는,
“오 이런! 오 세상에!”
라며 소리쳤다.
“너무 사랑스러운 아이야!”
난장이들은 너무도 기뻤기 때문에 백설 공주를 깨우지 않고 계속 잠들 수 있게 했다. 
일곱 번째 난장이는 밤새껏 한 시간 간격으로 돌아가며 동료 난장이들의 침대를 같이 사용해 잠을 잤다.  
아침이 되어 깨어났을 때 백설 공주는 난쟁이들 일곱 명이 있는 것을 보고 깜짝 놀랬다. 
하지만 난쟁이들은 상냥하게 그녀에게 이름이 “무어냐?”고 물었다. 
“제 이름은 백설 공주예요.”라고 그녀가 대답했다. 
“어떻게 우리들의 집에 오게 되었니?”라며 난쟁이들이 말했어요.
그래서 백설 공주는 자신의 새 엄마가 자신을 죽이고 싶어 한 것이며 사냥꾼이 자신의 목숨을 살려준 것이며, 그래서 자신이 하루 종일 도망친 것이며, 그러다 결국 그들이 사는 이곳까지 다다르게 된 이야기를 해주었다. 
난쟁이들이 말했어요.
“만약 네가 우리 집 정돈이며, 요리며, 침대 정리며, 설거지며, 바느질이며, 뜨개질 등등 네가 깔끔하게 정리정돈해줄 수 있는 걸 해준 의향이 있다면, 우리와 함께 이 집에 머물러도 좋아, 네가 지내는 데 불편함이 없도록 해줄게.”
“온 마음을 다해,”라며 백설 공주가 말했어요. “예에요.”
그렇게 하여 백설 공주는 이들과 머물게 되었답니다.
아침이 되어 난쟁이들이 구리와 금광을 깨기 위해 산으로 떠나고 나면 백설 공주가 집에 남아 정리정돈을 했고요, 난쟁이들이 저녁이 되어 돌아오면, 저녁식사를 마련해주었어요.
그러다 보니 소녀는 종일 혼자 있어야했는데요, 그래서 착한 난쟁이들이 누누이 경고하길,
“네 새 엄마를 조심해, 네가 여기 있는 걸 그녀가 곧 알게 될 거니까, 그러니 절대 아무도 집안에 들이선 안 돼.”
자신이 백설 공주의 심장을 먹은 줄로 감쪽같이 믿고 있던 여왕으로선 자신의 미모가 세상에서 가장 아름다울 거라 믿어 의심치 않았어요.
그래서 자신의 거울로 가 말했어요…
“거울아, 거울아, 벽장 속에 박힌 거울아, 이 세상에서 누가 제일 예쁘지?”
그러자 거울이 대답하길…
“오, 왕비님, 당신이 제가 지금껏 본 무척 아름다운 여성이긴 합니다만, 하지만 언덕 너머 일곱 난쟁이들이 사는 곳에 백설 공주님이 여전히 살아 잘 지내고 계신 한에는, 이 세상 어느 누구의 미모도 백설 공주만할 리 없어요.”
그 바람에 여왕이 화들짝 놀랬다. 왜냐하면 그 거울은 절대 거짓말을 하는 거울이 아니었기 때문이었다. 
그래서 사냥꾼이 자신을 속인 일이며 사랑스러운 백설 공주가 여전히 살아 있는 것을 여왕도 알게 되었다. 
그래서 왕비는 어떻게 하면 백설 공주를 죽일 수 있을지 생각에 생각을 거듭했다. 
왜냐하면 자신의 미모가 이 세상 최고가 아니라는 생각에 질투심이 불같이 일어나 그녀 자신을 가만 두질 않았기 때문이다. 
마침내 왕비가 뭔가를 생각해내고, 얼굴에 분장을 하고는, 마치 나이 많은 ‘행상인’(돌아다니며 물건을 파는 사람)처럼 옷을 차려 입고는 세상사람 아무도 그녀를 알아보지 못하게 변장을 했다.  
이렇게 변장을 하고 왕비는 일곱 개의 산을 넘어 일곱 명의 난쟁이들이 사는 오두막으로 가 문을 노크하며 큰 소리로 말했다. 
“예쁜 거 팔아요, 싸고(저렴하고), 싼(저렴한) 걸로.”
그러자 사랑스런 백설 공주가 창으로 밖을 내다보며 소리쳤어요.
“안녕하세요, 인상 좋으신 할머님, 무얼 파시나요?”
“다 팔죠, 예쁜 것들이 많답니다.”라고 할머니가 대답했어요.
“코르셋(여성용 속옷. 배와 허리를 조여서 몸매를 보기 좋게 잡아줌)의 끈들이 색상별로 다 있답니다.” (그림형제의 「백설 공주」에는 할머니로 변장한 왕비가 사과를 팔지 않고, 코르셋 끈을 팝니다. 어린 백설 공주가 코르셋 끈이 왜 필요한지 -_-;; 그림 형제가 『동화집』을 낼 당시의 독자들 취향이 좀...)
그러면서 할머니는 화사한 색깔의 비단으로 엮어 만든 끈 하나를 내밀어 보였어요.
‘그래 인상 좋은 할머님은 (집에) 들여도 될 거야.’라고 생각한 백설 공주는 문의 빗장을 벗기고는 예쁜 끈(코르셋 끈들)들을 샀답니다.
“아가,”라며 할머니가 말했어요. “당황한 모양이구나. 자, 그럼 내가 이번 한 번만은 적당히 졸라 메어줄게.”
그래서 백설 공주는 한 치의 의심도 없이 할머니 앞에 서서 할머니가 새 끈들로 자신을 메어줄 수 있게 했어요.
하지만 그 할머니가 너무도 갑작스레 그리고 너무도 꽉 끈을 조이는 바람에 백설 공주는 그만 숨을 쉬지 못해 마치 죽은 마냥 쓰러지고 말았어요.
“자 이제 내가 가장 예쁘렷다.”라며 왕비(할머니)가 혼자 말하며 달아나 버렸습니다. 
그 후 오래지 않아 저녁이 되어, 일곱 난쟁이들이 집으로 돌아왔다, 그만 자신들의 사랑스러운 백설 공주가 바닥에 누워 한 치의 미동(움직임)도 않고 죽은 마냥 있는 것을 보고 소스라치게 놀라고 말았어요.
난쟁이들이 백설 공주를 안아 일으켜보니, 끈(코르셋 끈)들이 너무 꽉 조인 것을 보곤, 그 끈들을 잘라 버렸어요, 그제야 백설 공주가 가까스로 조금씩 숨을 쉬기 시작해 잠시 후 다시 살아날 수 있었답니다. (이 부분도 왕자님이 백설 공주에게 키스를 하는 디즈니의 백설 공주와는 다른 부분이죠~)
백설 공주로부터 자초지종(처음부터 끝까지의 과정)을 들고 난 난쟁이들이 말했어요.
“그 늙은 노파(할머니)는 분명 사악한 왕비 일 거야. 그러니 넌 앞으로 다시는 어느 누구도 이 집 안에 들어선 안 돼.”
하지만 사악한 왕비는 왕궁에 도착하자마자 곧바로 거울 앞으로 가 물었어요…
“거울아, 거울아, 벽장 속에 박힌 거울아, 이 세상에서 누가 제일 예쁘니?”
그러자 거울이 전처럼 똑같이 대답하기를…
“오, 왕비님, 당신은 제가 지금껏 본 무척 아름다운 여성이긴 합니다만, 하지만 언덕 너머 일곱 난쟁이들이 사는 곳에 백설 공주님이 여전히 살아서 잘 지내고 계신 한에는, 이 세상 어느 누구의 미모도 백설 공주만할 리 없어요.”
이 소리를 듣자마자, 왕비는 피가 거꾸로 솟구치는 것만 같았다. 
왜냐하면 거울이 사랑스런 백설 공주가 다시 살아난 모습을 보여주었기 때문이었다. 
“네 기어코,”라며 왕비가 말했다. “네 목숨을 끊어주마.” 
그래서 왕비는 자신이 알고 있던 마법의 도움을 빌리기로 했다. 
왕비는 독을 품은 빗(머리 빗는 빗)을 만들었다. 
그런 다음 왕비는 다시 변장을 하곤 또 다른 노파(할머니)의 모습으로 꾸몄다. 
그렇게 하여 노파(할머니)가 일곱 개의 산을 넘어 일곱 명의 난쟁이들이 사는 오두막까지 가 문을 노크하며 큰 소리로 말했다. 
“별 거 다 팔아요, (값)싸요, 싸!”
사랑스런 백설 공주가 창밖으로 내다보며 말했다. 
“저리 가세요. 이제 다시는 아무도 집에 들일 수 없어요.”
“보기만 하시라는 되도요,”라고 노파(할머니)가 말하면서 독을 품은 빗을 내뻗으며 들어보였다.  
그게 무척 좋아보였기 때문에 소녀(백설 공주)는 자기 자신을 기만하고(속이고) 말았어요. 그래서 문을 열어주었답니다.
(가격)흥정을 시작했을 때 노파(할머니)가 말했어요.
“자 이번 한 번만은 내가 단정하게 빗어주마.” 
불쌍한 백설 공주는 한 치의 의심도 없이 노파(할머니)가 하자는 대로 했고, 노파(할머니)가 백설 공주에게 빗질을 함과 동시에 독이 퍼졌고, 그 바람에 소녀(백설 공주)는 의식을 잃고 쓰러지고 말았어요.
“절세의 미녀다만,”라며 사악한 여자(노파)가 말했어요. “네 미모도 이제 이것으로 끝났다.” 
그리곤 노파는 달아나버렸어요.
마침 운이 좋게도 그때가 저녁 무렵인지라, 일곱 난쟁이들이 집에 돌아왔어요.
마치 죽은 거 마냥 바닥에 누워 있는 백설 공주의 모습을 보자 난쟁이들은 즉시 새어머니를 의심했어요. 
그리고 백설 공주를 살피다 (머리카락 속에 있는) 독을 품은 빗을 발견했어요.
난쟁이들이 급히 빗을 떼어내자 백설 공주가 다시 제정신으로 돌아와 그들에게 그동안 있었던 일을 말해주었답니다.
그런 다음 난쟁이들은 백설 공주에게 다시 한 번 단단히 이른 다음 문단속을 잘 할 것과 아무에게도 문을 열어주지 말라고 일렀어요.
왕궁(원문→집)으로 돌아오자마자 왕비는 즉시 거울로 가 말했어요…
“거울아, 거울아, 벽장 속에 박힌 거울아, 이 세상에서 누가 제일 예쁘니?”
그러자 거울이 전처럼 대답하기를…
“오, 왕비님, 당신은 제가 지금껏 본 무척 아름다운 여성이긴 합니다만, 하지만 언덕 너머 일곱 난쟁이들이 사는 곳에 백설 공주님이 여전히 살아서 잘 지내고 계신 한에는, 이 세상 어느 누구의 미모도 백설 공주만할 리 없어요.”
라고 했다.
거울에게서 이 말을 듣자마자 왕비가 분노로 와들와들 떨며 고개를 흔들었다. 
“내 목숨과 바꾸는 한이 있더라도,”라며 왕비가 외쳤다. “반드시 백설 공주를 죽이고 말리라!”
그 후 즉시 왕비는 비밀스러운 독방으로 들어갔어요.
거긴 지금껏 어느 누구도 들어가 본 적이 없는 곳이었답니다.
바로 거기서 왕비는 아주 무시무시한 독이 든 사과를 만들었어요.
밖으로 나와 보니, 독이 든 그 사과는 무척 탐스럽게 생긴 붉은 사과로 보였답니다. 
어찌나 탐스럽게 익었든지 그것을 보는 모두들 탐을 낼 것만 같았어요.
하지만 무심코 그 사과를 한 입만 먹더라도 즉시 죽고 말리란 건 의심이 없었죠.
사과가 준비되자, 왕비는 얼굴을 칠하고 시골 아낙 옷차림으로 변장을 하였어요.
그런 다음 일곱 개의 산을 넘어 일곱 난쟁이들이 사는 오두막으로 갔답니다.
시골 아낙(왕비)이 문으로 노크했어요.
백설 공주가 창밖으로 내다보며 말했어요.
“전 누구도 (집안으로) 들일 수 없어요. 일곱 난쟁이들이 절대 그러지 말라고 일러주었기 때문이에요.”
“그건 나도 마찬가지랍니다.”라며 시골 아낙이 대답했어요. “곧 사과가 다 팔릴 거 같거든요. 그러니 당신에게만 하나 드리리다.”
“아뇨,”라며 백설 공주가 말했어요. “전 한 입도 먹을 수 없어요.”
“독이 들었을까 봐요?”라며 노파가 말했다. “봐 봐요, 그럼 내가 이 사과를 두 조각으로 잘라, 새빨간 쪽은 당신이 먹고, 새하얀 쪽은 제가 먹으리다.”
왕비가 사과를 너무도 약삭빠르게 만들었기 때문에 새빨간 쪽에만 독이 있었던 것이다.  
사과가 무척 맛있어 보였기 때문에 백설 공주도 한 입 배어먹고 싶었다. 
그래서 그 시골 여자가 사과 한쪽을 먹는 것을 지켜보고서야 안전한 사과라는 것을 확신하고선 더 참지 못하고 손을 내뻗어 독이든 그 사과의 반쪽을 먹었다.  
하지만 백설 공주는 한 입 가득 사과를 베어 물자마자 곧바로 쓰러지고 말았다. 
무서운 눈초리로 백설 공주를 살펴보고 난 다음 왕비는 큰 소리로 웃으며 말했다. 
“눈처럼 새하얗고, 핏방울처럼 붉고, 칠흑(=검정색=순수함) 같이 순수하다만! 이번엔 제 아무리 난쟁이들이라 해도 너를 다시 살려내진 못할 게다.(원문→다시 정신을 차리게 하진 못할 게다)”
그리하여 왕궁(원문→집)으로 돌아온 왕비가 거울에게 이렇게 물었을 때…
“거울아, 거울아, 벽장 속에 박힌 거울아, 이 세상에서 누가 제일 예쁘지?”
거울이 마침내 다음과 같이 대답하였어요…
“오, 왕비님, 당신이 이 세상에서 가장 아름다워요.”
라고요.
그런 다음에서야 질투심에 많던 그녀의 마음도 휴식을 얻었답니다. 뭐 그래봐야 질투쟁이가 누릴 수 있는 휴식엔 한계가 있지만 서도요.
저녁 무렵에 집에 돌아온 난쟁이들은 바닥에 누워 있는 백설 공주를 발견했어요.
하지만 그녀는 더 이상 숨은 쉬고 있지 않았고 죽어 있었어요.
난쟁이들이 백설 공주를 안아 일으킨 후 독을 품은 뭔가를 찾을 수 있는지 살펴보았어요, 그런 다음 끈(코르셋 끈)들을 풀어주고, 머리를 빗질한 다음, 그녀의 얼굴을 물과 포도주로 씻어주었지만 어떤 일인지 전혀 소용이 없었어요.
불쌍한 아이는 그렇게 죽어 죽은 상태로 남아 있게 되었어요. 
일곱 명의 난쟁이들은 백설 공주를 관에 눕힌 다음 둘러 앉아 그녀를 위해 울고 울고 또 울며 3일을 보냈어요.
그런 다음 백설 공주를 묻어주려고 보니, 그녀가 마치 살아 있는 것 마냥, 사랑스럽고 새빨간 두 볼(뺨)을 가지고 있는 게 보였다. 
난쟁이들이 말했다. 
“도저히 이 사랑스러운 아이를 어두운 흙속에 묻을 순 없어.”
모든 방향으로 들여다볼 수 있는 유리로 된 투명한 관이 하나 있었다. 거기다 백설 공주를 눕혀 놓았다. 그런 다음 유리관 위에는 금색으로 “백설 공주”의 이름과 “임금님의 딸”이라는 것을 적어놓았다. 
그런 다음 난쟁이들은 그 유리관을 산 위에다 내다놓고, 난쟁이들 한 명씩 돌아가며 유리관 옆을 지켰다.
새들도 또한 도착해 백설 공주를 위해 울어주었는데, 올빼미(한 마리)가 첫 번째로 도착했고, 그 다음에 큰까마귀(한 마리)가 왔었고, 마지막으로 비둘기(한 마리)가 와서 울어주고 갔다.  
그리하여 백설 공주는 이제 유리관 안에 오래도록, 오래도록 누워 변함없이 마치 잠든 것 마냥 보였다. 
왜냐하면 원래가 백설 공주는 눈송이 같이 새하얗고, 핏방울처럼 붉고, 칠흑(=검정색=순수) 같은 머릿결을 지닌 아이였기 때문이다. 
그러다 우연히 왕자님이 숲에 들어오셨다가 난쟁이들의 집에 들러 하룻밤을 보내게 되었다. 
왕자님이 산 위에 있는 유리관을 보니, 그 안에 아리따운 백설 공주가 누워 있었다. 유리관 위에 황금 글씨체로 적힌 글귀도 읽게 되었다. 
그런 다음 왕자님이 난쟁이들에게 말했다. 
“저 유리관을 내게 다오, 너희들이 원하는 것은 무엇이든 주겠노라.”
그렇지만 난쟁이들이 대답하길,
“이건 이 세상의 황금을 받고 파는 물건이 아니옵니다.”
그래서 왕자님이 말했어요.
“그럼 저 유리관을 내게 선물로 다오, 왜냐면 나는 이제 백설 공주를 하루도 못 보고는 살 수 없기 때문이다. 그녀를 내 보물1호로 지정하고 소중히 대해주겠노라.”
왕자님이 이런 식으로까지 말씀을 하시자 마음씨가 착했던 난쟁이들이 왕자님께 연민(=동정심)의 정을 느끼고 왕자님에게 유리관을 주었답니다.
그런데 왕자님이 부하들을 시켜 유리관을 어깨(부하들의 어깨) 위에 매고 갈 때, 우연히 부하들이 나무의 ‘그루터기’(나무를 베고 남은 부분)에 발이 걸려 넘어지는 사태가 발생하고 말았는데, 그 충격으로 백설 공주가 삼켰었던 독이 든 사과 조각이 “툭!”하고 그녀의 목에서 빠져나오고 말았던 것이다. 
머지않아 백설 공주가 눈을 뜨고 유리관의 뚜껑을 들어 올리며 바로 앉으며 다시 한 번 살아났다. 
“어머나, 여기가 어디에요?”라며 백설 공주가 소리쳤다. 
기쁨으로 충만한 왕자님이 말했어요.
“저와 함께 가시고 계십니다.”
그러면서 지금까지 일어난 일들을 왕자님이 백설 공주에게 설명해주었어요.
왕자님이 말했어요.
“저는 이 세상 무엇보다 당신을 사랑하오. 그러니 저와 함께 아버님의 궁전으로 가시어, 제 아내가 되어 주시오.” 
그래서 백설 공주도 기꺼이 왕자님과 함께 궁전으로 갔다.
그들의 결혼식은 거대한 볼거리와 함께 웅장하게 거행되었어요.
하지만 백설 공주의 사악한 새엄마 또한 결혼식 ‘연회’(음식을 마련하고 손님을 초대하는 잔치)에 초대되었어요.
그래서 아름답게 옷을 입고 그녀(백설 공주의 새엄마)는 거울 앞으로 가 이렇게 말했어요…
“거울아, 거울아, 벽장 속에 박힌 거울아, 이 세상에서 누가 제일 예쁘니?”
그러자 거울이 대답하기를…
“오, 왕비님, 당신도 무척 아름다운 여성이긴 합니다만, 하지만 제가 아는 한에는 어린 왕비님(백설 공주)이 더 아름다우세요.”
그래서 사악한 여자(백설 공주의 새엄마)는 욕설을 내뱉었다. 이제 그녀는 너무도 비참하고 너무 지독히도 비참하여 이제 뭘 어찌해야할지 몰랐다. 
우선 결혼식(백설 공주와 왕자님의 결혼식)에 안 가고 싶었지만 한 시도 마음이 안정이 되지 않아 어린 왕비의 얼굴을 안 보곤 못 뵈길 것 같아 가고야말았다. 
그리고 그녀(백설 공주의 새엄마)가 들어섰을 때, 백설 공주를 발견하고야 말았다. 
그래서 그녀(백설 공주의 새엄마)는 분노와 두려움에 너무 악이 받쳐 말 한 마디 내뱉지 못하고서 옴짝달싹 못하고 서 있기만 했다. 
하지만 철제 ‘슬리퍼’(실내화)가 이미 벽난로 위에서 달구어지고 있었고, 그 자리에 있던 사람들이 집게를 이용해 달구어진 철제 슬리퍼(실내화)를 가져다 그녀(백설 공주의 새엄마) 앞에 놓았다. 
그런 다음 그녀(백설 공주의 새엄마)는 새빨갛게 달구어진 그 신발을 신도록 강요당했고, ‘절벽에 떨어져 죽을 때까지’(원문→쓰러져 죽을 때까지) 뛰어 돌아다니고 또 뛰어 돌아다녀야했다. 

(끝)

동화 「백설 공주」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「백설 공주」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter53.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



54. 배낭과 모자와 뿔피리



옛날 옛적에 세 형제가 살았어요.
그들은 점점 가난에 빠져들었어요. 그러다 결국은 너무도 가난해져 배는 너무 너무 고픈데 먹을 것도 없고 마실 거도 없어서 굶어야만 하는 지경에까지 놓이게 되었지요.  
그때 그들이 말했어요.
“더는 이리 살 수 없어. 차라리 세상 밖으로 나가 우리의 운수를 찾아보는 게 더 낫겠어.”
그리하여 그들이 출발했어요.
그들은 정말 아주 먼 길을 걷고 또 걸었고 수많은 풀밭을 밟고 또 밟으며 나아갔지만 이렇다 할 행운을 찾지는 못했어요.
그러던 어느 날 그들이 큰 숲에 도착했어요. 
그 숲 한 가운데엔 언덕이 하나 있는데, 그들이 가까이 다가가서 보니 그 언덕은 온통 은이었어요.
그때 첫째가 이야기했어요.
“난 됐다. 이 은이면 내가 바라던 행운을 찾았다고 봐. 난 이 이상 더 바라지 않거든.”
그는 운반할 수 있는 까짓것 그 은을 주워 담곤 몸을 돌려 집으로 출발했어요.
하지만 나머지 두 형제는 말했지요.
“우리가 찾고 있는 건 은 그 이상이야.”
그래서 그들은 은엔 손대 대지 않고 계속 나아갔어요.
쉬지 않고 이틀을 꼬박 걸으니 이번엔 온통 금으로 뒤덮인 언덕이 하나 나왔어요.
둘째 형이 걸음을 멈추더니 어찌해야 될지 자신도 결정을 못한 건지 생각에 잠겼어요.  
“어쩌지?”라며 그가 말했어요. “지금 여기 이 금으로도 평생 먹고 살 거리로 충분한데, 아님 더 걸어가 볼까?”
결국 그는 결심을 굳히고 호주머니 속에 들어가는 까짓것 금을 주워 담은 다음 막내 동생에게 작별인사를 건넨 후 집으로 갔어요.
하지만 막내는 말했지요.
“은과 금도 나를 움직일 순 없어. 그 걸론 운에 대한 내 시험을 포기시킬 순 없어. 지금까지로 봐선 아마 더 걸어가다 보면 더 좋은 게 나오겠지.” 
그는 여행을 계속 했어요. 
그가 삼일을 꼬박 걷자, 드디어 이전 어느 숲보다도 훨씬 큰 숲이 하나 나왔고, 어찌나 울창한지 그 끝이 보이지 않을 정도였어요.
다만 먹고 마실 걸 하나도 찾지 못한 그는 완전히 지친 상태였어요.
그때 숲의 끝자락이 어디까지인지 살펴보려고 그가 높은 나무위로 올라가보았어요.
하지만 눈이 가 닿는 저 너머까지도 나무 꼭대기들밖엔 보이지 않을 정도로 숲은 넓었어요.
그래서 그가 다시 나무를 내려오기 시작했어요.
배가 너무나 고픈 나머지 그가 혼자 생각했어요.
“단 한 번만이라도 배불리 먹어봤으면!”
그가 내려와서 보니 그 나무 아래엔 한 상 가득 푸짐한 요리가 식탁 위에 차려져있지 뭐예요.
연기가 모락모락 피어나며 그에게 방실거리고 있었어요.
“얼씨구 이번엔,”라며 그가 말했어요. “내 소원이 금방 이뤄졌네.”
누가 차린 상인지 묻고 따질 틈도 없이, 그는 식탁으로 가 배고픔이 완전히 달래질 때까지 즐겁게 먹었어요.
다 먹고 나자, 그가 생각했어요. 
“이 사랑스런 식탁보(음식을 덮는 천)가 여기 외딴 숲에서 방치되느니 내가 주워가야겠다.”
그는 식탁보를 정성스럽게 접어 자신의 호주머니 속에 넣었어요.
그런 다음 그는 앞으로 계속 나아갔어요.
밤이 되어 다시 배가 고파지자, 귀여운 천을 펼쳐 시험해보고 싶어서, 천을 펼치고 말했지요.
“진수성찬이 한 번 더 차려졌음 해.”
그 말이 입술에서 나오자마자 끝내주는 음식들이 가득 담긴 많은 접시들이 마치 기다리고 있던 마냥 식탁 위에 차려졌지요. 
“이거 원 요리사가 따로 없군.”라며 그가 말했어요. “이거 하나만 있음 은과 금이 산만큼 있는 거보다 더 값지겠는걸.”
그가 옳게 본 대로 그건 ‘요술 식탁보’였어요.
하지만 그 식탁보가 아무리 신기해도 그를 만족시키지는 못했지요.
그는 여전히 세상을 돌아다니며 자신의 운을 좀 더 시험해보길 원했거든요.
어느 날 밤 그는 어느 외딴 숲에서, 먼지투성이에 시꺼먼 ‘숯 굽는 사람’ 하나를 만났어요.
그는 거기서 숯을 태워 불로 감자 몇 개를 구워 막 식사를 하려던 찰나였지요.
“안녕하세요, ‘검은 새’님!”라며 젊은이가 말했어요. “울적하실 거 같은데 지내실 만한가 보네요?”
“여기서 어제와 내일이 오늘과 같다네.”라며 ‘숯 굽는 사람’이 대답했어요. “매일 밤 감자(먹는 감자)지! 어떤가, 입에 맞을지는 모르겠지만 좀 들 텐가?”
“감사합니다만,”라며 여행자가 대답했어요. “저녁거리를 뺏어먹을 순 없지요. 차라리 당신이 제 손님이라 치고, 제가 한 상 가득 차려보겠습니다.”
“자네가 무슨 수로?”라며 ‘숯 굽는 사람’이 말했지요. “자네도 나보다 나을 게 없어 보이는데. 여긴 두 시간 걸음걸이 내에 개미새끼 한 마리 없는 곳이라네.”
“그러니까 제가 한 턱 내겠다는 거지요.”라며 젊은이가 대답했어요. “지금껏 드신 그 무엇보다 맛있을 겁니다.”
그 후 즉시 그가 천을 자신의 배낭(여행용 가방)에서 꺼내 바닥 위에 펼치더니 말했어요.
“어여쁜 천아, 상을 차려죠.”
그러자 즉시 삶은 고기며 구운 고기가 짠하고 나타나고 마치 방금 막 부엌에서 가져온 거 마냥 따끈따끈 했어요.
‘숯 굽는 사람’은 빤히 바라보더니 자시라고 말하고 말고 할 것도 없이 성큼 달려와 자신의 시꺼먼 입에 허겁지겁 음식을 집어넣었어요.
그들이 모두 먹고 났을 때, ‘숯 굽는 사람’이 흡족하다는 미소를 띠우며 말했어요.
“원 세상에, 그 식탁보 한 번 기똥차네. 내가 가지고 있음 이 숲에서 요긴 하겠어. 여긴 맛난 요리는 해줄 요리사가 한 명도 없거든. 어떤가, 자네 내가 가진 것과 저 물건을 바꾸지 않겠나. 저기 구석에 매달아 놓은 게 병사용 배낭이라네. 비록 오래되어 낡긴 했어도 굉장한 힘이 숨겨진 배낭이지. 내겐 더 이상 쓸모가 없으니 저 식탁보와 바꿈세.”
“말씀하신 굉장한 힘이란 게 뭔지 부터 알아야겠습니다.”라며 젊은이가 대답했어요.  
“말해줌세.”라며 ‘숯 굽는 사람’이 대꾸했어요. “손으로 배낭을 두드릴 때마나, 여섯 명의 병사를 거느린 병장(군인)이 한 명씩 나온다네. 모두들 머리에서부터 발끝까지 완전무장을 하고서 말이야. 그들은 자네가 뭘 명령하던 따른다네.”
“그렇다면야,”라며 젊은이가 말했어요. “마다할 리가 없죠. 바꿉시다요.”
그리하여 그는 그 ‘숯 굽는 사람’에게 자신의 식탁보를 주고 대신 벽걸이에 걸린 배낭을 들어 등에 둘러매곤 작별인사를 했어요.
잠시 걷던 그가 배낭이 지닌 요술적 힘을 시험해보고 싶어져 두드려봤지요.
즉시 일곱 명의 병사들이 그에게로 척척 발소리를 내며 걸어왔어요.
병장(군사)이 말했어요.
“주인님 무슨 분부(명령)십니까?” 
“‘숯 굽는 사람’집으로 얼른 가서 내 요술 식탁보를 다시 가져오거라.”
그들이 왼쪽으로 척척 걸어가더니, 머지않아 ‘숯 굽는 사람’에개서 다짜고짜 그걸 빼앗가 들고 다시 돌아왔어요.
젊은이는 그들에게 물러가라 명령한 다음 다시 계속 걸어갔어요. 더 큰 행운을 희망하면서 말이죠.
그리하여 그는 해가 질 무렵쯤 또 다른 ‘숯 굽는 사람’집에 도착했어요. 그는 이제 막 불가에 저녁을 만들러하고 있었지요.
“국물은 없지만 소금에 찍어먹는 게 괜찮다면 여기 앉아 감자 좀 드시구려.”라며 검댕이 투성이의 친구가 말했어요. 
“아니오, 말씀은 고맙습니다만, 이번엔 제가 당신에게 한 턱 내지요.”라며 그가 식탁보를 펼치자 즉시 아름다운 접시들에 요리가 수북이 쌓였어요.
그들은 함께 앉아 맛있게 먹고 마셨어요.
진심으로 맛나게 멋었답니다.
식사를 마치고 나자, ‘숯 굽는 사람’이 말했어요.
“내겐 요상한 모자가 하나 있다오, 머리에 쓰고서 이렇게 돌리면 대포가 12발 씩 한꺼번에 발사된 다요. 그래서 모든 걸 쓰러뜨릴 수 있지요. 아무도 무서울 게 없소. 그런데 이 망할 놈의 숲에만 있다 보니 내겐 영 쓸모가 없구려. 당신만 좋다면야 내 모자와 당신 식탁보를 바꾸면 어떻겠소.”
“오 제 머리에 딱 맞는데요.”라며 젊은이가 말하더니 모자를 집어 들더니 머리에 썼어요. 그런 다음 자신의 식탁보는 ‘숯 굽는 사람’ 집에 남겨두고 출발을 했답니다.
하지만 이번에도 그는 멀리 가지 않고 단번에 자신의 배낭을 두드려 병사들을 불러내 그 식탁보를 다시 빼앗아오게 했어요.(ㅜ_ㅜ 나쁜 놈... 그림형제의 동화에는 나쁘지만 머리 좋은 사람들이 행복한 결말을 얻는 주인공들인 경우가 너무 많음... 현실과 너무 닮았음...-_ㅜ;;)
‘또 다른 꼭대기엔 뭐가 있나 가봐야지.’라며 그가 생각했어요. ‘뭔가 더 있을 거 같은 느낌 아닌 느낌이 들거든.’
그의 짐작은 진짜였어요.
그가 하루 온 종일을 걸어가자, 세 번째 ‘숯 굽는 사람’의 집이 나왔어요.
그는 이전번 사람들처럼 젊은이에게 국물이 없다면 서도 감자를 먹어보라며 초대했어요.
하지만 젊은이는 이번에도 자신의 요술 식탁보로 그에게 거나한 저녁을 제공했고, 아무 것도 모르는 ‘숯 굽는 사람’은 아주 만족해하며 먹었지요.
마침내 ‘숯 굽는 사람’이 그 식탁보를 자신에게 주면 젊은이에게 뿔피리를 주겠다고 제안했어요. 
모자의 힘과는 완전히 차원이 다른 뿔피리였어요.
뿔피리를 한번 불면 담장(벽)이 죄다 무너졌고, 한 번 더 불면 요새(성)가 무너졌고, 한 번 더 불면 모든 도시며 마을들이 쑥대밭이 되는 무서운 뿔피리였어요.
젊은이는 기꺼이 ‘숯 굽는 사람’에게 자신의 식탁보를 주었어요.
하지만 멀리가지 않아 자신의 병사들을 보내 다짜고짜 그 식탁보를 되찾아왔지요.
그리하여 젊은이는 여행에서 배낭과 모자와 뿔피리까지 셋 다를 얻게 되었어요.
“이제,”라며 그가 말했어요. “성공도 했겠다, 집으로 돌아가 형들이 어떻게 지내고 있나 봐야지.”
그가 집에 도착해보니, 형들은 이미 음과 금으로 장식된 당당한 집 한 채를 지어놓고 떵떵거리며 잘 살고 있었어요.
그가 만나러 들어갔어요. 하지만 그는 거지꼴을 한 외투와 다 해진 모자를 쓰고 낡은 배낭을 메고 있었죠.  
이쯤 되니 형들이 그를 사람취급 안했어요.
형들이 조롱하며 말했어요.
“은과 금으로 만족하는 꼴은 죽어도 못 보겠다던 놈이 그래서 더 좋은 걸 찾아 떠나겠다던 놈이. 얼씨구, 웬 거지꼴로 돌아왔더냐. 막강한 왕이 되어 황금마차를 타고 돌아오지 않고 웬 거지가 왔어.”
그들은 냉큼 막내를 문밖으로 내쫓아버렸어요.
막내의 분노 게이지가 폭발했어요.
그가 배낭을 톡톡 두르려 완전무장한 150명의 병사들을 불러냈어요.
그가 형들의 집을 당장 포위하라 명령했어요.
병사 두 명이 개암나무 회초리를 들고 들어가더니 두 몰지각한 형들이 “아이고, 동상(=동생) 나 죽네.”라고 말할 때까지 때리고 또 때렸어요.(ㅜ_ㅜ)
한바탕 소동이 벌어지자, 사람들이 너나할 거 없이 몰려들어 두 형을 구해주려했지만, 병사들이 버티고 서 있는 바람에 어쩔 수 없었어요.
이 소식이 결국 왕에게까지 흘러들어가, 왕이 노발대발하며 대장에게 군대를 끌고 가 당장 그 마을의 소란을 진압하라고 지시했어요.
하지만 배낭이 있던 막내가 곧 상대방보다 더 많은 병사들을 불러내는 바람에 오히려 대장과 병사들이 흠뻑 두들겨 맞아 얼굴이 반쪽이 되어 되쫓기고 말았어요.
왕이 말했어요.
“그런 깡패 놈들을 그냥 둘 순 없다.”
그리하여 다음날 왕은 훨씬 더 많은 군대를 보냈지만, 상황이 역전되진 않았죠.
왜냐면 젊은이(막내)가 즉시 훨씬 더 많은 병사들을 불러내 되갚게 해버렸으니까요.
게다가 이번엔 머리에 쓴 모자를 두 번씩이나 돌렸더니, 우레 같은 대포들이 비 오듯 발사되어, 왕의 군대는 포탄에 맞아 날아가기 바빴죠.
“이리된 마당에,”라며 그가 말했어요. “왕이 내게 공주를 아내로 주기 전까진 멈추지 않으리라. 또한 이참에 내 이름으로 온 왕국을 점령하리라.”
이 말은 왕에게도 전해졌고, 그래서 왕이 자신의 딸에게 말했어요.
“이러지도 저러지도 못하게 생겼구나. 그가 바라는 걸 들어주지 않곤 못 배기게 생겼다. 평화와 내 왕관을 유지하기 위해선, 너를 내주어야겠구나.”
그리하여 결혼식이 성대하게 거행되었지요.
하지만 공주님은 속이 타 죽을 지경이었어요. 왜냐면 남편이 고작 초라한 모자나 쓴, 그리고 낡은 배낭이나 멘 비천한 남자였으니까요.
공주는 남편을 제거하고 싶어 밤낮으로 어떻게 하면 성공할 수 있을지를 생각했어요.
그때 그녀가 속으로 생각했어요.
‘혹시, 그의 놀라운 힘이 이 배낭 속에서 생기는 건가?’
그래서 그녀가 속내를 감추고서 그를 어르고 달래며 애무했어요.
남편의 마음이 누그러진 걸 확인한 그녀가 말했어요.
“이 못생긴 배낭일랑은 옆에 벗어나 주세요, 당신 모습만 꼴사납게 하자나요, 저의 남편이 배낭이나 매다니 너무 창피해요.”
“에끼,”라며 그가 말했어요. “이 배낭은 내 보물 제1호오. 이것만 가지고 있음, 세상 무서울 게 없소.”
그는 그 배낭의 비밀을 아낌없이 그녀에게 들려주었어요.
그러자 그녀가 마치 그에게 키스를 해주려는 듯 그의 품에 안기더니 솜씨 좋게 그 배낭을 그의 어깨에서 벗겨 가지고 달아났어요.
그녀는 혼자되자마자 냉큼 그걸 두드렸어요. 그녀는 병사들에게 그들의 전(=이전) 주인을 잡아서 당장 궁전에서 쫓아내라고 명령했어요.
병사들이 복종했고, 그래서 위선적인 아내는 더 많은 병사들을 더 많이 보냈어요.
병사들이 그를 국경 밖까지 쫓아냈어요.
정말이지 위기일발이라 작은 모자까지 그에게 없었다면 그는 완전히 파멸할 뻔했어요.
하지만 모자를 쓰고 두 번 돌리자마자, 그 즉시 대포가 천둥을 뿜기 시작해 모조리 다 쓰러뜨렸어요.
왕의 딸이 찾아와 자비를 베풀어 달라 빌 정도였어요.
그녀가 감미로운 말로 구슬리며 착한 마음씨를 약속하였기에, 그는 설득되어 화를 누그러뜨렸어요. 
공주는 정말 그에게 우호적으로 행동했어요. 마치 전보다 훨씬 더 많이 그를 사랑하는 듯이요.
일정 시간이 지난 후 그녀가 다시 그를 놀리자, 그가 이번엔 다른 비밀을 털어났어요. 
“누가 배낭을 들고 가 힘을 얻더라도 상관없소. 이 낡은 모자만 있음 무서울 게 없다오.”
그녀는 비밀을 알자마자, 그가 잠든 때를 기다려 모자를 잽싸게 낚아채 도로 한 복판에 집어 던져 못쓰게 만들어버렸어요.  
하지만 아직 그에겐 뿔피리가 남아 있었지요.
위기의 순간 그가 있는 힘을 다해 그걸 불었어요.
그 즉시 모든 담장(벽)들과, 요새들과, 도시들과, 마을들이 와장창 무너져 내려, 왕과 공주마저 떨어지는 건물자재에 눌리고 뭉개져 죽고 말았어요.
거기에 그치지 않고 그가 조금만 더 길게 뿔피리를 불자, 이번엔 정말 모든 게 폭삭 다 내려앉고 말았어요.
그리하여 서 있는 돌이 하나도 없게 되고 말았지요.
이제 어느 누구도 그에게 더는 대항하지 못했어요.
그리고 그는 스스로 국왕의 자리에 올랐답니다. (맞죠? 나쁜 사람이 지혜로워 좋은 결과를 얻은 경우랍니다.^^ 이런 얘기는 그림형제의 동화에 많아요.)

(동화 끝)

동화 「배낭과 모자와 뿔피리」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「배낭과 모자와 뿔피리」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter54.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



55. 룸펠슈틸츠헨



■ 미리알림

이번엔 가볍게 읽을 수 있는 동화인 거 같습니다. 다행~:)
 
(분문 시작)

룸펠슈틸츠헨

예전에 가난한 방앗간 주인이 한 명 살고 있었는데, 그에게는 무척이나 아름다운 딸이 한 명 있었더랬죠.
그런데 하루는 자신을 뽐내려고 한 말인,
“내겐 짚을 금으로 바꿀 수 있는 딸이 있다.”(←실제로 짚을 금으로 바꾼다는 말이 아니라 똑똑하다는 의미로 한 말임)
라는 이 말이 어쩌다 왕의 귀에도 들어가게 되었어요.
그래서 왕이 이 방앗간 주인에게 말했어요.
“그 참 기똥찬 기술이구나. 네 딸이 그토록 똑똑하다면야, 내일 궁전으로 데리고 오거라, 내 그 애가 그럴 수 있는지 시험해보리라.”
방앗간 주인의 딸이 불려오자, 왕은 그녀를 짚이 가득찬 방에 가두곤, 딸랑 ‘물레’(실을 뽑는 도구) 하나와 ‘릴’(실을 감는 틀) 하나만 주며 이렇게 말했어요.
“자 시작해 보거라, 만에 하나 내일 아침까지 이 짚을 금으로 밤새 바꿔놓지 않음 죽을 줄 알거라.” 
그리곤 왕이 직접 문을 잠그곤 방앗간 주인의 딸만 홀로 있게 했다. 
그리하여 방앗간 주인의 불쌍한 딸은 앉아서 이젠 어떻게 해야 할지 알 수가 없었다.
왜냐하면 자신은 짚을 금으로 바꾸는 방법을 전혀 모르기 때문이었다. 
그렇게 비참한 신세로 앉아 있다 결국 울음을 터뜨리게 되었다. 
바로 그때 문이 열리며 난쟁이(남자임)가 들어오더니 말했어요.
“안녕하세요. 방앗간 집 따님. 왜 울고 계신가요?”
“아아!”라며 딸이 대답했어요. “짚을 금으로 바꾸라는데 난 도무지 어떻게 하는지를 몰라.”
“만약 제가 그 일을 해드리면,”라며 난쟁이가 말했어요. “제게 무엇 주실 건가요?”
“목걸이요.”라며 딸이 말했어요.
난쟁이가 목걸이를 받아 챙기더니 물레바퀴 앞에 직접 앉았어요.
“휙(←돌아가는 소리), 휙, 휙.”
이렇게 세 번을 돌리자 ‘릴’(실을 감는 틀)이 가득 찼어요.
그러자 다른 릴을 꽂더니 다시 “휙, 휙, 휙.” 이렇게 세 번을 돌리자 두 번째 ‘릴’(실을 감는 틀)도 역시 가득 찼어요.
그 작업은 아침까지 이어졌어요.
드디어 아침 무렵이 되자 모든 짚들이 황금으로 변했어요.
모든 ‘릴’(실을 감는 틀)도 황금으로 가득 찼고요.
왕은 새벽에 벌써 거길 와 있다 황금을 보곤 놀라워하며 기뻐했어요.
그러자 왕이 욕심이 더 생겼어요.
왕은 방앗간 집 딸을 짚으로 가득한 또 다른 방으로 데리고 갔어요.
이번엔 짚이 어제보다 훨씬 더 많았어요.
그리곤 “이 짚 모두를 오늘 밤 사이에 모두 금으로 바꿔 놓거라, 만약 어길 시엔 목이 달아날 줄 알거라.”라고 말했어요.
어쩔 줄을 몰라 딸이 이번에도 울고 있었어요.
그때 문(방문)이 다시 열리며 난쟁이가 나타나더니 말했어요.
“만약 내가 너를 위해 저 짚들을 금으로 바꿔 준다면 넌 내게 뭘 줄 거니?”
“손가락에 끼고 있는 이 반지.”라고 딸이 대답했어요.
난쟁이가 반지를 받더니 다시 물레를 돌리기 시작했어요.
아침 무렵이 되자 모든 짚들이 반짝이는 금으로 변해 있었어요.
기대 이상의 광경에 왕은 뛸 듯이 기뻤어요.
하지만 사람 욕심 끝도 없는 법, 왕이 또 욕심이 생겼어요.
그래서 방앗간 집 딸을 정말 큰 방에 데려갔어요. 그 방에도 짚이 가득 차 있었어요.
왕이 말했어요.
“오늘밤 사이에 이것들도 죄다 금으로 바꾸거라. 만약 이번에도 네가 성공한다면 내 아내로 맞아들이겠다.”
왕이 생각했어요.
‘저애가 비록 방앗간 집 딸이다만 세상에서 저 애보다 더 부자인 아내는 찾지 못할 거니까.’
딸만 남자, 난쟁이가 세 번째로 다시 나타났어요.
난쟁이가 말했어요.
“내가 이번에도 너를 위해 짚을 금으로 바꿔주면 넌 내게 뭘 줄래?”
“이번에는 줄 게 아무것도 없어.”라며 딸이 말했어요.
“그럼 나와 약속해줘. 네가 만약 왕비가 되면, 그 첫째 아이를 내게 주기로.”
‘그런 일이 일어날지 말지를 누가 알아?’라고 방앗간 집 딸은 생각했어요.
그리고 딱히 지금 이 상황을 해쳐나갈 방법도 떠오르지 않았고 말이에요.
그래서 딸은 난쟁이에게 약속을 하고 말았어요.
그러자 난쟁이가 한 번 더 짚을 금으로 바꾸어주었어요.
아침이 되어 왕이 들어왔을 때 왕은 자신이 바라던 대로 되어 있는 걸 발견했어요.
그래서 방앗간 집 딸과 결혼식을 올렸답니다.
그리하여 예쁜 딸은 이제 왕비가 되었어요.
1년 후, 그녀는 예쁜 아기를 낳았어요. 그렇지만 난쟁이와의 약속은 까맣게 잊고 있었더랬죠.
그러던 어느 날 불쑥 난쟁이가 그녀의 방으로 들어와 이렇게 말하는 거예요.
“나와 약속했던 걸 이제 줘.”
경악하고 만 왕비는 아이를 데려가지만 않겠다면 왕국의 금은보화란 보화는 다 주겠다고 제안했어요.
하지만 난쟁이는 이렇게만 말할 뿐이었어요.
“아니. 그런 건 내 집 근처에도 많아. 널리고 널린 게 보물이거든.”
그러자 왕비가 울고불고 하는 바람에 난쟁이는 그녀가 불쌍해졌어요.
그래서 “그럼 3일의 시간을 줄게.”라고 난쟁이가 말했어요. “그때까지 내 이름을 맞춰봐, 그럼 아기를 데려가지 않을게.” 
그래서 왕비는 밤새 내내 지금껏 들어봤던 이름들을 생각하고 또 전국방방 곳곳으로 사신을 보내 난쟁이의 이름을 알아보게 했어요.
다음날 난쟁이가 들어왔을 때, 왕비는 “캐스파”, “멜키오르”, “발타자르”,(앞뒤 설명 : 앞에 나온 캐스파, 멜키오르, 발타자르는, 예수님이 태어났을 때 찾아온 동방박사 세 명의 이름들임) 그리고 그녀가 알고 있는 모든 이름들을 하나씩 말하기 시작했어요.
하지만 그때마다 난쟁이는 말했어요.
“그건 내 이름이 아냐.”
두 번째 날, 왕비는 이웃 왕국으로 사람을 보내 그곳 사람 이름들을 알아오게 했어요.
난쟁이가 나타났을 때 왕비는 전혀 낯설고 진귀한 이름들을 나열하기 시작했어요.
“혹시 이름이 ‘소의 갈비살’(영어발음 /쇼트리브스/)이니, 아님 ‘양의 정강이’(/시프섕크스/)니, 그것도 아님 ‘레이스 끈’(/레이스렉/)이니?”
하지만 이 모든 이름에 대해 난쟁이는 매번,
“그건 내 이름이 아냐.”라고 대답했어요. 
세 번째 날에, 사신이 다시 돌아와 말했어요.
“독특한 새 이름을 발견하지 못하였사옵니다, 다만 제가 숲 끝자락에 있던 높은 산에 들어갔는데, 거긴 여우와 산토끼들이 서로 ‘잘 자’라며 밤인사를 주고받는 곳이었습니다. 바로 거기에 작은 집 한 채가 있었는데, 그 집 앞에 모닥불이 하나 피어져 있었습니다. 그 모닥불 주위를 어느 우스꽝스러워 보이는 난쟁이 한 명이 뛰어다니더군요. 그는 한 발로 뛰며 이렇게 소리치고 있었사옵니다…”
“빵은 오늘 굽고, 맥주는 내일 만들어야지, 그 다음엔 젊은 여왕의 아가야가 내 것이 되니. 하! 내 이름이 룸펠슈틸츠헨 인 걸 아무도 모른다니 이 어찌 기쁘지 아니한가.”
왕비가 이 얘기를 전해 듣고서 얼마나 기뻐했는지 여러분은 상상히 되세요!
곧이어 난쟁이가 들어와 물었어요.
“자, 왕비마마, 내 이름이 뭐지?”
왕비는 우선 이렇게 말했어요.
“네 이름이 ‘콘래드’(남자이름)니?”
“아니.”
“그럼 네 이름이 ‘해리’(남자이름)니?”
“아니.” 
“그렇담 혹 네 이름이 ‘룸펠슈틸츠헨’이니?”
“악마가 네게 그걸 말해주었구나! 악마가 네게 그걸 말해주었어!”라며 난쟁이가 큰 소리를 지르더니, 분노에 휩싸여 자신의 오른발을 땅속 깊숙이 쳐 넣었고 그 바람에 오른발이 완전히 땅속 아주 깊숙이까지 박히고 말았어요. 
격분한 난쟁이는 두 손으로 왼발을 사정없이 끌어당겨 직접 자신의 몸을 두 동강이 내고 말았답니다.

(끝)

동화 「룸펠슈틸츠헨」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「룸펠슈틸츠헨」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter55.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



56. 연인 롤랑 (사랑하는 롤랜드)



옛날 옛적에 두 딸을 둔 여자가 한 명 살고 있었어요. 그녀는 진짜 마녀였지요.
두 딸 중 하나는 못생겼고 못됐어요. 마녀는 자신의 친딸인 이 애를 너무도 사랑했어요.
하지만 다른 하는 아름답고 착했어요. 그래서 마녀는 자신의 의붓딸인 이 애를 아주 미워했지요.
의붓딸이 예쁜 앞치마를 하나 가지고 있었는데, 친딸이 무척 부러워하며 탐을 내자, 엄마인 마녀가 그 앞치마를 가지게 해주겠다고 말했어요.
”가만있어라, 얘야.“라며 노파가 말했어요. “네게 되게 해줄 테니. 그 애는 오랜 못 살게다. 왜냐면 오늘밤 내가자고 있는 그 애 목을 딸 거거든. 그러니 넌 주의 깊게 침대 안쪽에서 잠을 자다가 그 애가 침대 앞쪽으로 오게 밀도록 해라.”
때마침 구석에 서 있다 그 얘기를 듣지 않았음 그 불쌍한 처녀는 정말 끝장이 났을지 몰라요.
너무도 무서워 그녀는 하루 온종일 문밖으로 한 걸음도 나가지 못했답니다.
잘잘 때가 되자, 마녀의 친딸이 먼저 침대에 들었어요, 침대 안쪽에 눕기 위해서였죠.
하지만 그녀는 그만 곯아떨어지고 말았답니다.
그래서 의붓딸이 친딸을 침대 앞쪽으로 살살 밀고는 자신이 침대 안쪽 벽에 딱 붙어 누웠어요.
밤이 되자, 노파가 살금살금 기어들어왔어요. 그녀의 오른손엔 도끼가 한 자루 들려 있었지요. 그녀가 왼손으로 침대 밖에 누워 있는 애가 있는지 살피더니, 이내 곧 두 손으로 도끼를 번쩍 들더니 “싹둑!” 하고 자기 친딸의 머리를 자르고 말았어요. 
노파가 가버리자, 처녀는 일어나 자신의 연인인 ‘롤랑’(남자이름) 집으로 달려가 문을 마구 두드렸어요.
그가 나오자, 그녀가 다급하게 말했어요.
“내말 들어봐, 자기 롤랑, 우린 지금 당장 달아나야해. 내 새엄마가 나를 죽이려고 하다가 그만 자기 친딸을 죽이고 말았어. 날이 밝으면 진상을 파악하고서 뒤쫓아 올 거야.” 
“하지만,”라며 롤랑이 말했어요. “자기 일단 ‘요술봉’부터 챙겨와. 그게 없으면 우린 그녀로부터 달아날 수가 없어.”
처녀는 요술봉을 가져오고, 죽은 친딸의 머리도 가져나왔어요.
그러다 피 세 방울을 바닥에 떨어뜨리고 말았지요.
한 방울은 침대 앞에, 또 한 방울은 부엌에, 나머지 한 방울은 계단 위에 떨어졌어요.
그런 다음 그녀가 연인과 함께 서둘러 달아났어요.
다음날 아침 노파가 일어나더니 자신의 친딸을 불렀어요. 친딸에게 그 앞치마를 주기 위해서였죠. 하지만 친딸은 나오지 않았어요.
그러자 마녀가 소리를 질렀어요.
“너 어딨는 거야?”
“여기요, 계단 위에요, 바닥을 쓸고 있어요.”라며 첫 번째 핏방울이 대답했어요.
노파가 밖으로 나가보았지만 계단위엔 아무도 보이지 않았어요.
그러자 또 소리를 질렀어요.
“너 어딨느냐고?”
“여기 부엌에요, 몸을 녹이고 있어요.”라며 두 번째 핏방울이 큰소리로 말했어요.
그녀가 부엌에 들어가 보았지만 아무도 없었어요.
그러자 그녀가 다시 소리쳤어요.
“너 어딨는데?”
“아, 여기 침대에요, 자고 있었어요.”라며 세 번째 핏방울이 외쳐댔어요.
그녀가 침실 침대로 가보았는데, 아뿔싸 이게 무슨 광경인가요?
그녀의 친딸이 머리가 잘린 채 피를 콸콸 쏟고 있지 않겠어요.
마녀가 화를 벌컥 내며 창문으로 뛰어올랐어요. 그러면 아주 멀리까지 내다볼 수 있기 때문이지요. 
저 멀리서 그녀의 의붓딸과 그녀의 연인 롤랑이 허겁지겁 달아나고 있는 게 보였어요.
“그렇게는 안 되지, 암.”라며 그녀가 외쳤어요. “멀리 못가 내게 잡히고 말게다.”
그녀가 요술 장화를 신었어요. 그걸 신으면 1시간 걸음을 한 걸음에 갈 수 있거든요.
이내 곧 그녀가 그들을 따라잡기 시작했어요.
하지만 노파가 성큼성큼 빠르게 오고 있는 걸 본 처녀가 요술봉을 이용해 자신의 연인인 롤랑을 연못으로 변신시키고 자신은 그 한 가운데에서 헤엄치고 있는 오리로 변했어요.
마녀는 연못에 죽치고 서선 빵 조각들을 연못으로 던지며, 오리를 유혹하러 갖은 노력을 다해보았지만 오리는 그 유혹에 빠지지 않았어요.
그래서 노파는 밤에 집으로 돌아가야 했어요. 
그러자 처녀와 그녀의 연인 롤랑은 본래의 모습으로 다시 돌아와 동이 틀 때까지 밤새 걸었어요.
그런 다음 처녀가 자신은 아름다운 한 송이 꽃으로 변해 가시덤불 속에 서 있고, 연인 롤랑은 바이올린 연주가로 변하게 했어요.
머지않아 마녀가 성큼성큼 걸어 그들 쪽으로 다가와 연주자에게 말했어요.
“이봐 연주자, 내가 저기 저 예쁜 꽃을 잡아 뽑아도 돼?”
“오, 네.”라며 그가 대답했어요. “아주머니가 그러시는 동안 제가 연주를 해드리죠.”
그녀가 서둘러 가시덤불 속으로 기어들어가더니 막 그 꽃을 잡아 뽑으려 했어요. 왜냐하면 그녀는 그 꽃이 누구인지를 잘 알았거든요.
그 순간 그가 연주를 시작했어요. 
그러자 자의반 타의반 그녀가 저절로 춤을 추기 시작했어요. 그건 마법의 연주 때문에 시작된 춤이었어요.
그가 더 빨리 연주하면 할수록, 그녀도 더 격렬하게 춤을 추기 시작했어요.
그 바람에 가시들에 그녀의 옷이 다 찢어지고, 온 몸에서 피가 철철 흘러나올 때까지 가시에 찔리고 베이고 했어요.
혼자 힘으론 멈출 수가 없던 그녀는 그렇게 바닥에 죽어 쓰러질 때까지 춤을 춰야했어요.
그들이 안전해지자, 롤랑이 말했어요.
“이제 난 아버지에게로 가 결혼을 허락받을게.”
“그럼 그 동안 난 여기 머물며 자기를 기다릴게.”라며 그 여인이 말했어요. “대신 아무도 나를 못 알아보게 빨간 돌로 된 ‘경계표’(표지판)로 변해 있을게.”
그런 다음 롤랑은 떠났고, 여인은 들판에 빨간 돌로 된 ‘경계표’(표지판)로 변해 선 채 사랑하는 연인을 기다렸지요.
하지만 집에 도착한 롤랑은 그만 다른 여인네의 유혹에 빠져 처녀를 잊고 말았어요.
불쌍한 여인은 오랫동안 거기 서 있었지만, 아무리 기다려도 그는 돌아오지 않았고, 그녀는 슬픈 나머지 스스로를 한 송이 꽃으로 변하게 했지요.
그녀가 생각했어요.
“아무라도 좋으니 누가 이리 와서 나를 짓밟아줬으면.”
하지만 그 일이 정말 일어나고 말았지요.
어느 양치기 한 명이 양 떼를 몰고 들판에 나왔다 그 꽃을 보곤 너무 예쁜 나머지 꽃을 뽑아 가지고 돌아가 자기 서랍장 속에 넣어두었어요.
이때부터 이상한 일들이 양치기의 집에 일어났어요.
그가 아침에 일어나보면 집안 일이 모두 되어 있는 거예요. 방청소도 되어 있고, 식탁이며 ‘긴 의자’(벤치)들도 깨끗하게 닦아져 있고, 난로의 불씨도 피워져 있고, 물은 떠놓은 상태였지요.
한낮(낮12시)이 되어 집에 돌아와 봐도 상이 근사하게 차려져 있지 뭐예요.
양치기는 이에 대해 처음엔 별 생각을 안 했었어요. 왜냐면 집안에 사람의 그림자는 없었으니까요. 스스로도 감출 거도 없었고요. 그래서 이런 좋은 시중(돌봄)이 좋았었죠.
하지만 이게 한 두 번이지 계속되자 너무 두려워진 나머지 ‘여자 주술사’(점쟁이)를 찾아가 조언을 구했어요.
여자 주술사가 말했어요.
“마법이 걸려 있어. 아침 일찍 뭔가가 움직이는 소리가 나거든, 그게 뭔지 보고 싶음 소리 나는 위로 흰 천을 던져봐, 그럼 마법이 멈출 테니까.”
양치기가 들은 대로 해보기로 했어요.
다음날 아침 동이 트자, 서랍장이 저절로 열리며 꽃이 나오는 게 보였어요.
그가 재빨리 그쪽으로 흰 천을 던졌어요.
그 즉시 변신이 끝이 나고, 지금껏 가사 일을 도왔던 그녀가 나타났어요.
그녀는 자신의 얘기를 모두 해주었어요.
“그럼 저와 결혼하길 원하신 건가요?”라고 양치기가 묻자, 그녀는 그 말이 반가우면서도 대답했어요.
“아뇨. 전 아직 제 연인 롤랑에게 충실하고 싶어요. 비록 그이가 저를 버렸지만요. 하지만 저를 내쫓으시지만 안으시면, 제가 당신을 위해 계속 가사 일을 해드릴게요.”
이때쯤 롤랑의 결혼식이 열리기로 한 날이 가까워지고 있었어요.
그런데 나라의 오랜 관습에 따르면 모든 아가씨들이 참석해서 신혼부부를 위한 축가를 불러줘야 했어요.
충실한 처녀가 이 소식을 전해 듣곤 너무도 상심이 되어 정말 심장이 산산조각 찢어지는 것 같았어요.
그래서 절대 거기에 가지 않으리라 마음 먹었어요.
하지만 다른 아가씨들이 오더니 그녀를 거기로 데려가 버렸어요.
그녀가 노래를 불러야할 차례가 다가올 때까지 그녀는 뒤로 물러나 있었어요.
마침내 그녀만 남게 되자, 그녀도 더는 뺄 수 없었어요.
하지만 그녀가 노래를 시작하고 그 소리가 롤랑의 귀가에 들리자, 그가 벌떡 일어나며 외쳤어요.
“나 이 목소리 알아, 저건 내 진짜 신부야, 난 다른 사람과는 결혼 안할 거야!”
그가 잊었던 모든 것 그리고 그로 인해 그의 마음을 흐리게 하고 있던 모든 것들이 순식간에 다시 그의 마음 속 깊은 곳에서부터 샘솟기 시작했어요.
그런 다음 충실한 처녀는 자신의 연인 롤랑과 결혼식을 올렸답니다.
그리하여 고생 끝 행복 시작이 되었답니다.

(동화 끝)

동화 「연인 롤랑」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「연인 롤랑」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter56.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



57. 황금새



옛날에 궁전 뒤에 아름다운 정원을 둔 왕이 살고 있었어요.
정원엔 황금 사과들이 달리는 나무가 한 그루 있었지요.
사과가 빨갛게 익어가자, 왕은 개수를 헤아렸어요.
바로 그 다음날 사과 한 개가 사라지고 말았어요. 
이 보고를 받은 왕이 매일 밤 그 나무 아래서 보초를 한 명 세우게 했어요.
왕에겐 세 아들이 있었기에, 첫째에게 보초를 세웠어요. 정원에 밤이 깔리고, 한밤중(밤 12시)이 되자마자, 그는 졸린 걸 이겨내지 못했어요. 역시나 다음날 사과가 하나 없어졌어요.
다음날 둘째에게 보초를 서게 했어요. 그도 밤 12시가 되자마자 골아 떨어졌기에 형과 별반 다르지 않았지요. 아침이 되자 역시나 사과가 하나 사라져있었거든요.
이번엔 막내아들 차례라, 막내가 가뜩 준비를 하였지만, 왕은 막내가 미덥지 못해 ‘형만은 아우 없는 법인데’라고 생각했어요.
하지만 결국엔 막내보고 보초를 서보라 했어요.
막내는 그 나무 아래에 누웠지만 자진 않았어요. 졸음에 굴복되지 않은 거죠. 
밤 12시를 알리는 종이 울리자, 뭔가가 하늘에서 푸드덕 활발히 움직이더니, 달빛을 받으며 깃털이 온통 황금빛으로 빛나는 새 한 마리가 날아오고 있는 게 보였어요.
새가 그 나무 위에 앉더니 사과 한 개의 꼭지를 뜯어냈어요. 바로 그때 젊은이가 화살을 그 새에게 쏘았어요. 
새가 푸드덕 날아갔어요. 하지만 화살이 새의 깃털 하나를 맞춘 상태라, 새의 깃털 하나가 바닥에 떨어지고 말았어요.
젊은이가 그걸 주워 다음날 날이 밝자마자 왕에게 가져가 어젯밤에 있었던 일을 죄다 말씀드렸어요.
왕이 조정대신(신하)들을 모두 불렀어요.
모두들 말했어요.
“이 깃털은 왕국 전체보다 값집니다.”
“깃털이 그리 귀중하다면야,”라며 왕이 선언했어요. “하나만 가질 게 아니라. 내가 그 새 전부를 가져야겠다!”
첫째가 출발했어요. 
그는 자신의 영리함을 믿었지요. 그래서 황금새도 금방 찾을 거라 생각했어요.
그가 상당한 거리를 갔을 때, 숲 앞에 여우 한 마리가 앉아 있었어요.
그래서 그가 총을 장전하고 그 놈을 맞추려고 했어요.
여우가 다급하게 소리쳤어요.
“저를 쏘지 마세요! 그럼 그 보답으로 당신께 좋은 충고를 해드릴게요. 황금새를 찾으러 가시는 길이잖아요. 그럼 저녁이 되어 당신이 도착하는 마을에 두 여인숙이 서로 마주보고 서 있을 텐데요. 그 중 하나는 불이 밝혀져 있어 환할 거고 안은 사람들로 왁자지껄할 거예요. 하지만 그 여인숙엔 절대 들어가심 안 돼요. 맞은편에 있는 여인숙이 아주 흐름해보여도 거길 들어가셔서 주무셔야 해요.”
“네 까짓 미천한 들짐승이 뭘 안다고 충고 질이냐?”라며 왕자는 생각하고 방아쇠를 당겼어요.
하지만 총알이 여우를 빗나갔고 여우는 꼬리를 바짝 세우고선 잽싸게 숲으로 도망을 쳤답니다.
그래서 그는 계속 길을 갔어요.
저녁이 되자 정말 두 여인숙이 있는 마을이 하나 나왔어요.
여인숙 하나에는 사람들이 앉아 춤을 추고 있고, 다른 여인숙 하나는 볼품없고 초라한 모습이었어요.
‘내가 바보 말을 들을 거 같아, 참내 원.’라며 그가 생각했어요. ‘싸구려 여인숙엘 들어갈 바엔 좋은 여인숙에서 묵는 게 낮지.’
그래서 그는 즐거운 분위기의 여인숙에 들어가 술 마시고 떠들며 방탕하게 거기서 살았어요. 그는 이제 새와 아빠 그리고 좋은 충고는 완전히 잊어버렸답니다.
한 달이 지나고 또 한 달이 지나도 첫째가 돌아오지 않자, 이번엔 둘째가 황금새를 찾아 여행을 떠났답니다.
첫째를 만난 여우가 또 둘째를 만나 좋은 충고를 해주었지만, 둘째는 그 말에 꿈쩍도 하지 않았어요.
그가 두 여인숙에 도착해보니, 자신의 형이 음악이 흘러나오는 여인숙 창문에 서서 둘째를 소리쳐 불렀어요.
그러자 한 치의 망설임도 없이 둘째가 안으로 들어가 형과 같이 흥청망청 즐기며 세월을 잊어버렸어요.
한참이 또 지나자, 이번엔 막내 왕자가 가서 자신의 행운을 시험해보겠다고 자청하고 나섰어요.
하지만 아바마마는 허락지 않았죠.
“너라고 뭔 수로,”라며 그가 말했어요. “황금새를 구한단 말이냐, 네 형들도 못한 걸. 그러다 안좋은 일이라도 생기면 넌 너 하나도 간수할 수 없지 않니. 이렇게 부족한 게 많은 녀석인데.”
하지만 왕은 결국 안절부절 못하다 막내가 떠나는 걸 허락해주었어요. 
역시나 숲 앞엔 그 여우가 앉아 있었어요.
여우는 자신을 살려주면 좋은 충고를 해주겠다 제안했어요.
막내는 성품이 착했기에 말했어요.
“안심해, 귀여운 여우야, 난 너를 해치지 않을 테야.”
“후회하시지 않을 거예요.”라며 그 여우가 대답했어요. “제 꼬리 뒤에 타세요, 그게 훨신 더 빠를 거예요.”
그가 올라타자마자 여우가 바람에 머리카락을 가르며 나무 밑동과 돌들을 뛰어넘으며 달렸어요.
그들이 마을에 도착하자 젊은이가 내렸어요.
그는 좋은 충고를 따랐답니다. 두 번 돌아보지도 않고 곧장 허름한 여인숙으로 들어갔죠. 그는 거기서 그날 밤을 차분하게 보냈어요.
다음날 아침 그가 탁 트인 들판으로 들어서자 이미 와서 앉아 있던 여우가 다시 말했어요.
“당신이 뭘 하셔야될지를 좀 더 말씀드릴게요. 곧장 쭉 나아가세요, 그럼 성이 하나 나올 거예요. 그 성 앞엔 많은 병사들이 누워 있을 거예요, 당신은 그들을 전혀 걱정 안하셔도 되요, 그들은 모두 골아 떨어져 자고 있을 테니까요. 그들 한 가운데를 지나 곧장 성으로 들어가시며 모든 방들을 지나가게 될 건데, 황금새가 나무새장 안에 앉아 있는 방이 나올 때까지 쭉 나아가셔야 해요. 그 나무새장 바로 옆엔 보기 좋은 황금새장이 빈 채 같이 있는데, 나무새장이 흔해빠졌다고 그 새를 꺼내 황금새장 안에 넣으심 절대로 안돼요, 그리되면 만사가(일이) 꼬인다고요.”
이 말과 함께 여우가 자신의 꼬리를 쭉 내밀었고, 왕자가 그 위에 올라탔지요.
그러자 여우는 바람에 머리카락이 날릴 때까지 나무 밑동과 돌멩이들을 뛰어넘어며 달렸답니다.
성에 도착해서 보니 모든 게 여우의 말한 대로였어요.
왕자는 황금새가 나무새장 안에 갇혀 있는 방으로 들어갔어요.
황금새가 가까이에 서 있었고, 황금사과 세 개가 방 여기저기에 나뒹굴고 있었어요.
‘하지만,’라며 그가 생각했어요. ‘이렇게 아름다운 새를 기껏 초라하고 흔해빠진 새장에 두라는 건 말이 안 돼.’
그래서 그가 새장 문을 열고 황금새를 끄집어내 황금새장에 넣었어요.
그러자마자 새가 날카로운 비명을 지르기 시작했어요.
병사들이 깨고 황급히 달려와 왕자를 감옥에 가두었어요.
다음날 아침 왕자는 재판정으로 나가 모든 걸 자백하고 사형을 선고받았어요.
하지만, 왕이 말했어요.
“바람보다 더 빨리 달린다는 황금말을 내게 가져와라. 그럼 네 목숨을 살려주고 덤으로 이 황금새까지 네게 주마.”
왕자가 출발했어요.
하지만 한숨이 절로 나오며 슬퍼졌죠. 왜냐면 황금말을 찾아나섰다지만 그 황금말이 어딨는지는 자신도 몰랐거든요.
하지만 갑자기 눈에 들어왔어요. 길 가에 자신의 옛 친구 여우가 앉아 있는 것이요.
“(당신) 꼴 좀 보세요.”라며 그 여우가 말했어요. “조심하시라고 제가 누누이 말씀드렸는데도 이 꼴이 되고 마셨잖아요. 하지만 참 어리석게도 용감하셨으니, 제가 이번 한 번 더 도움을 드리도록 하죠. 황금말을 얻는 방법을 알려드릴게요. 곧장 이 길로 쭉 가시면 성이 하나 나올 거예요, 거기 마구간에 말이 있어요. 하인들이 그 마구간 앞에 죽치고 앉아 있을 건데 거건 신경쓰지 마세요, 모두들 골아 떨어져 코를 골고 있을 테니. 당신은 그냥 쭉 걸어가서 그 말을 데리고 나오기만 하면 돼요. 다만 꼭 명심하셔야 할 게 하나 있어요. 그 말엔 나무와 가죽으로 된 흔해빠진 ‘안장’(말 위에 안장을 얹고 탐)을 얹어야지, 절대 그 바로 옆에 걸려 있는 황금안장을 얹었다간 사단(나쁜 일)이 벌어질 줄 아세요.“
그런 다음 여우가 자신의 꼬리를 쭉 뻗어주었기에, 왕자가 올라탔어요.
여우는 바람에 머리카락을 휘날리며 나무 밑동과 돌멩이들을 뛰어넘으며 내달렸답니다.
이번에도 모든 게 여우가 말한 대로 벌어졌어요.
왕자는 황금말이 서 있는, 성안 마구간으로 곧장 갔어요.
그가 막 흔해빠진 안장을 말 등 위에 얹으려고 보니 문득 이런 생각이 들었어요.
‘어라, 안장이 이런 아름다운 말에게 씌우기엔 너무 낡았잖아. 옆에 있는 좋은 안장을 줘도 안 될 건 없어 보이는데.’
그가 든 황금안장이 말에게 닿자마자, 말이 크게 울기 시작했어요.
하인들이 깨어나 젊은이를 붙잡아 감옥에 쳐 넣었지요.
다음날 아침 젊은이는 재판정에 출두하고 사형을 선고받았답니다.
하지만 왕이 약속했어요.
“만약 황금성에서 황금공주를 되찾아오면, 네 목숨을 살려주고, 덤으로 이 황금말도 주겠다.” 
천근만근 무거운 마음으로 젊은이가 다시 여행길에 올랐어요.
하지만 천만다행하게도 충실한 그 여우를 금방 또 만날 수 있었답니다.
“정말 상관 안 해주고 싶었지만,”라며 그 여우가 말했어요. “하지만 불쌍하셔서 봐 주는 거예요. 한 번 더 당신을 도와드리도록 할 게요. 이 길은 곧장 황금성으로 이어져요, 아마도 저녁 무렵 때까진 거기 도착하실 거예요. 한 밤중에 모두가 잠들었을 때, 아름다운 공주님이 목욕을 하러 목욕탕으로 들어가실 거예요. 그녀가 들어가면, 당신이 뛰어가 그녀에게 다짜고짜 키스를 하세요. 그럼 그녀가 순순히 당신을 따를 거예요. 그럼 당신은 그녀를 데리고 거길 떠나시면 돼요. 하지만 명심하세요, 절대 그녀가 그녀 부모님께 작별인사를 드리게 해서는 안 돼요, 그랬다가는 정말 큰 일 나신다고요.”
그런 다음 여우가 자신의 꼬리를 쭉 뻗었고, 왕자가 올라탔지요.
여우는 바람에 머리카락을 휘날리며, 나무밑동과 돌멩이들을 건너뛰며, 내달렸답니다.
그가 황금성에 도착해보니 정말 여우가 말한 그대로였어요.
그는 한밤중(밤12시)이 될 때까지 기다렸어요. 그러자 모든 게 깊은 잠에 빠졌어요.
아름다운 공주님이 목욕탕으로 들어가셨어요.
그때 그가 튀어나오며 그녀에게 키스를 했어요.
그녀는 그와 함께 가겠다고 말했어요. 다만 눈물을 흘리며 그 전에 먼저 자신의 부모님께 작별인사는 하게 해달라고 애처롭게 빌었어요.
처음엔 그도 그녀의 부탁을 거절했어요.
하지만 그녀가 더욱더 슬프게 울며 매달리자 결국 포기하곤 승낙해주었어요.
하지만 그 처녀가 아빠 침실에 발을 들여놓자마자, 아빠인 왕은 물론 성의 나머지 모든 사람들이 깨어나고 말았어요.
그 바람에 젊은이는 붙들려 감옥에 갇히고 말았어요.
다음날 아침 왕이 그에게 말했어요.
“너는 이제 죽은 목숨이다. 다만 내 침실 창문 앞에 떡하니 버티고 서서 내 시야를 가리는 저 몰지각한 언덕을 다른 곳으로 옮겨준다면 살려주겠다. 딱 8일 주마. 만약 그렇게만 해준다면 내 딸을 보상으로 네게 주마.”
왕자가 땅을 파내고 삽질을 쉬지 않고 시작했어요.
하지만 7일이 꼬박 다 지나도록 지금껏 자신이 뭘 했는지도 모를 정도로 결과가 시원찮았어요. 손바닥으로 하늘을 가리는 꼴이었죠.
그가 큰 상심에 겨워 거의 자포자기 하고 있는데.
7일째 되는 저녁에 그 여우가 다시 나타나 말했어요.
“아시죠, 당신은 정말 이래도 싸세요. 정말 이번 딱 한 번만 더 도와주는 거라고요. 저리 가서 좀 주무세요, 나머지는 제가 다 해놓을 테니까요.”
다음날 아침이 되어 그가 눈을 떴을 때 창문에 보이던 그 언덕이 사라져버렸어요.
젊은이가 기쁨에 겨워 왕에게로 달려가 “임무를 완수했노라”고 말씀 드렸지요.
그리하여 좋든 싫든 왕도 약속을 지켜야 할 판이라, 자신의 딸을 내어주고 말았답니다.
그리하여 둘이 함께 출발하는데, 멀리가지 않아 충실한 여우가 그들에게로 달려오며 말했어요.
“확실히 황금공주님을 얻긴 했지만,”라며 여우가 말했어요. “황금말도 가지셔야죠, 그것도 황금성의 처녀(황금공주) 소유니까요.”
“내가 어떻게?”라며 젊은이가 말했어요. 
“제 말대로 하심 돼요.”라며 여구가 말했어요. “우선 아름다운 처녀(황금공주)를, 황금성으로 당신을 보낸 왕께 바치세요. 그럼 떠들썩한 술판이 벌어질 테고, 그들이 만족해하며 당신께 황금말을 줄 거예요. 그럼 당신은 그 말을 받자마자 즉시 올라타 모든 사람들과 작별인사차 악수를 하는 척하세요. 맨 마지막으로 아름다운 처녀하고도 악수를 하는 척 하세요. 당신 손이 그녀와 닿자마자 즉시 그녀를 말에 태우곤 전속력으로 달아나세요, 그럼 아무도 당신들을 뒤쫓아 오진 못할 거예요, 세상에 황금말보다 빨리 달리는 말은 없으니까요.” 
모든 게 성공적으로 실행되었어요.
왕자님은 아름다운 공주님(황금공주)을 황금말에 태우고 가셨답니다.
여우도 같이 도망을 쳤지요. 
그 여우가 젊은이에게 말했어요.
”자, 이번엔 황금새를 얻으셔야 해요. 황금새가 있는 성에 가까워지면, 일단 처녀를 내려놓고 가세요, 제가 아가씨는 잘 지켜드릴 테니까요. 그런 다음 황금말을 타고 황금성의 마당에 들어가시면, 그 굉장한 모습에 큰 환호성이 일고 그들이 황금새를 당신에게 줄 거에요. 그럼 당신은 새장을 손에 쥐자마자 즉시 우리에게로 말을 타고 되돌아 와셔 아가씨까지 태우고 여길 벗어나심 돼요.“
그 계획은 이번에도 대성공을 거두었답니다.
왕자는 자신의 보물들을 가지고 말을 타고 막 출발했어요.
그때 여우가 말했어요.
“이젠 당신이 제 도움에 대한 보답을 해줄 차례세요.”
“내가 어떻게 해주면 되니?”라며 젊은이가 물었어요.
“저기 있는 숲에 들어가거든, 제게 총을 쏴 죽여주세요, 그런 다음 제 머리와 발을 잘라내 주세요.”
“그게 무슨 말이니.”라며 왕자님이 말했어요. “나를 도와준 네게 절대 그리는 못한다.”
여우가 말했어요.
“만약 당신이 정 그리는 못하시겠다면 제가 당신을 떠나는 수밖에요. 하지만 떠나기 전에 한 가지만 더 좋은 충고를 해드리고 가도록 할게요. 앞으로 두 가지를 조심하셔야 해요. 교수대의 ‘고기’(=인간)를 사지 마세요. 그리고 절대 어떤 우물가든 가장자리엔 앉지 마세요.”
그 말을 남기고서 여우는 숲으로 들어가 버렸어요.
젊은이가 생각했어요.
“참 이상한 동물이네, 변덕이 심한건가, 아니 누가 교수대의 고기를 산다는 거지? 그리고 빠지면 어쩌려고 우물 가장자리엔 앉는다는 거지.”
그는 아름다운 처녀(황금공주)와 함께 말을 타고 갔어요.
길은 다시 두 형들이 묵었던 마을로 이어졌지요.
거기에 큰 소동과 소란이 있었어요. 무슨 일인지 묻자 그곳 사람이 대답하길, “두 남자가 곧 교수형에 쳐해 집니다요.”라고 했어요.
그(왕자님)가 그 장소로 더 다가가보니 그건 바로 자신의 두 형들이었어요.
그들은 그 마을에서 온갖 비행을 다 저지르다가 돈을 몽땅 다 써버렸던 거예요.
“저들이 풀려날 길은 없습니까?”라며 그(왕자님)가 물었어요.
“돈만 준다면야 자유지,”라며 그 사람이 대답했어요. “하지만 누가 저 쓰레기들 값을 지불하려하겠어.”
그(왕지님)는 두 번 생각할 틈도 없이 당장에 돈을 지불하고 풀려난 형들과 함께 길에 올랐어요.
그들이, 여우를 처음 만났었던 그 숲에 왔을 때였지요.
숲 속은 쾌적해 기분 좋았어요.
그래서 두 형들이 말했지요.
“우물가에서 좀 먹고 마시며 쉬었다 가자구나.” 
그(막내 왕자님)가 동의했어요. 
그러다 그만 여우의 경고를 깜빡 잊고 별 생각 없이 우물가 가장자리에 앉고 말았어요.
그 즉시 두 형들이 그를 우물 속으로 밀어버리고, 처녀와 말과 새를 데리고 아바마마가 계신 집으로 가벼렸어요.
“황금새만 가져온 것이 아니라,”라며 그들(두 형들)이 말했어요. “황금말과 함께 황금성의 처녀까지 얻어 왔습니다.”
그 후 큰 잔치가 열렸어요.
하지만 말은 먹으려하지 않았고, 새는 노래하려하지 않았고, 처녀는 앉아서 울기만 했지요.
우물 속에 떨어진 막내는 죽지는 않았어요.
천만다행하게도 그 우물이 마른 우물이라, 그가 부드러운 이끼들 위에 떨어지는 바람에 다치기 않은 거예요.
하지만 다시 올라갈 길이 막막했죠.
이 곤란한 상황을 우리의 충실한 여우가 저버리지 않았어요.
여우가 오더니 냉큼 우물 속으로 뛰어내려오더니 그렇게 이르고 일렀는데도 자신의 경고를 무시한 것을 신랄하게 비난했어요.
“정말 이번이 마지막인줄 아세요.”라며 여우가 말했어요. “그나마 밝을 때 당신을 올려드리는 걸 다행으로 아세요.”
여우는 자신의 꼬리를 붙잡으라고 말했어요.
그가 단단히 붙잡자, 여우가 그를 끌고 위로 올라갔어요.
“이런다고 위험에서 다 벗어난 게 아니세요.”라며 그 여우가 말했어요. “당신의 몹쓸 두 형들이 당신을 확실하게 죽이려고 숲 주변에 보초병들을 세워놓고, 당신이 눈에 띠면 당장 죽이라고 했단 말예요.”
다행히 거지 한 명이 길가에 앉아 있기에, 젊은이는 그 자와 옷을 바꿔입었답니다.
이 방법(=변장)으로 그는 왕의 궁전까지 갈 수 있었어요.
아무도 그(막내왕자님)를 알아보지 못했지만, 새(황금새)가 다시 노래 부르기 시작했고, 말(황금말)이 다시 먹이를 먹기 시작했고, 아리따운 처녀(황금성의 황금공주)가 울음을 뚝 그쳤어요.
왕이 놀라워하며 물었어요.
“이게 무슨 징조인가?”
그러자 처녀(황금성의 황금공주)가 말했어요.
“저도 모르겠사옵니다. 다만 그렇게도 답답하던 가슴이 탁 터이고 지금은 후련해요! 진짜 신랑님이 오신 느낌이 들어요.”
그녀가 왕에게 그동안 있었던 일을 죄다 알려드렸어요. 비록 두 형들이 배신하면 죽여 버리겠다고 위협들을 했지만요.
왕이 성안에 있는 모든 사람들을 자기 앞으로 모이라 명령을 내리셨어요.
모인 사람들 중엔 젊은이(막내왕자)이도 거지꼴(옷)을 하고서 서 있었어요.
하지만 처녀(황금성의 황금공주)는 단번에 그를 알아보고 달려가 목을 얼싸안았어요.
사악한 두 형들은 붙잡혀 사형에 처해졌어요.
하지만 그(막내왕자)는 아름다운 처녀(황금공주)와 결혼식을 올렸고, 왕의 진정한 ‘상속인’(신분이나 재산을 물려받는 사람)이라 선포되었어요.
그럼 불쌍한 여우는 어찌되었을까요?
한참이 지나 왕자(막내왕자)가 그 숲을 다시 거닐어보고 있었어요.
그때 그를 만난 여우가 말했어요.
“당신은 이제 당신이 바라시던 바를 다 이루었군요. 하지만 제 비참함은 끝이 안 났어요. 이제 저를 자유롭게 해주세요.” 
여우가 또다시 눈물을 흘리며 자신을 총을 쏘아줄 것과 머리와 발을 잘라내 줄 것을 부탁하고 또 부탁했어요.
그(막내왕자)가 그리 해주었어요.
그 즉시 여우가 사람으로 변했어요.
그는 다름 아닌 ‘아름다운 공주님’(황금성의 황금공주)의 오빠였던 거예요.
그가 이제 자신에게 덮어씌워 있었던 마법에서 벗어난 거예요.
그리하여 이제부턴 그 무엇도 그들이 살아가는 동안 그들의 행복에 걸림돌이 되는 일이 더는 더 없었답니다.

(동화 끝)

동화 「황금새」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「황금새」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter57.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



58. 개와 참새



어느 ‘양치기 개’의 주인이 좋은 주인이 아니었어요.
오히려 개가 굶어도 본 체 만 체 했어요.
개는 더 이상 그와 살 수 없어 슬픔을 뒤로 한 체 길을 떠났어요.
길에서 개는 이렇게 말하는 참새 한 마리를 만났지요.
“멍멍이 형, 얼굴이 왜 그래?”
개가 대꾸했어요.
“배고파서 그래, 아무 것도 먹질 못했거든.”
그러자 참새가 말했어요.
“사랑하는 형, 그럼 나랑 도시로 가자, 내가 배부르게 해주께.”
그리하여 그들이 함께 도시로 갔어요.
그들이 정육점 가게 앞에 다다랐을 때, 참새가 개에게 말했어요.
“있어봐, 내가 너를 위해 고기 한 점을 빼내 아래로 던져줄게.”
참새(남자)가 가게에 내려앉더니 주변을 둘러본 후 아무도 안 보는 걸 확인하고는 모서리에 있던 고기를 쪼며 한동안 밀고 당기고 하더니 아래로 미끄러져 떨어지게 했어요.
그러자 개가 덥석 물고 한쪽으로 뛰어가더니 게걸스럽게 먹어치웠어요.
참새가 말했지요.
“이번엔 다른 가게로 가보자, 내가 한 점 더 먹게 해주께, 그럼 베가 좀 부를 거야.”
개는 두 번째 고기조각도 맛나게 먹어치웠어요.
참새가 물었지요.
“멍멍이 형, 이제 좀 배가 불려?”
“응, 좀 놨다, 얘.”라며 그가 대답했어요. “고기는 충분히 먹은 거 같은데, 빵이 좀 땡기네.”
참새가 말했지요.
“그럼 나를 따라 와봐.”
그런 다음 참새는 개를 데리고 빵가게로 가 먹음직한 ‘롤빵’(건포도를 넣은 둥근 빵) 두 개를 쪼아 아래로 떨어뜨려주었어요.
개가 좀 더 먹고 싶다 말하자, 참새가 이번엔 다른 빵가게로 개를 데리고 가 빵을 먹여주었어요.
배부르게 먹은 후, 참새가 말했어요.
“멍멍이 형, 이제 좀 배가 부른 거야?”
“응,”라며 그가 말했어요. “이제 좀 살겠다, 얘, 도시 외곽으로 나가 산책을 좀 하고 싶은데.”
그래서 둘은 큰길가로 나가 걸었지요.
하지만 날씨도 따뜻하고 산책도 좀 한 터라 개가 말했어요.
“아 피곤해 나 좀 누워 잘래.”
“그래, 그럼 자 둬.”라며 참새가 말했어요. “그러는 동안 나는 나뭇가지에 앉아 있을 테니까.”
개가 길가 위에 누워 꿀꿀 잠이 들었지요.
개가 거기 자고 있는데, 마차 한 대가 달려왔어요. 그건 말 세 마리가 끄는 마차로 포도주 통 두 개를 싣고 가고 있던 중이었어요.
하지만 참새가 보니 마부가 전혀 개를 비켜가려 하지 않고 자칫 잘못하면 누워있는 개를 바퀴로 밟고 갈 거 같아, 참새가 다급하게 소리쳤어요.
“마부 아저씨, 그러지 마여, 안 그럼 제가 당신을 가난하게 할 거예요.”
하지만 마부는 기가 차다는 듯 혼잣말로 으르렁거렸어요.
“별 시답지도 않은 게 잘도 나를 가난하게 만들겠다.”
그러면서 채찍을 휘둘러 개를 치고 그대로 줄행랑을 쳐버렸어요.
바퀴에 깔려 개는 죽고 말았답니다.
그러자 참새가 고함쳤어요.
“아저씨가 제 멍멍이 형을 치어 죽였어요, 제가 반드시 이 앙갚음으로 당신의 마차와 말들을 잃게 만들 거예요.”
“마차와 말을 뭐가 어쩌고 어째 흥!”라며 마부가 말했어요. “네까짓 게 무슨 수로?”
그러면서 그대로 쭉 가버렸어요.
그러자 참새가 마차 덮개 밑으로 기어들어가더니 ‘포도주 통을 따르는 구멍’을 오랫동안 쪼아 마침내 ‘구멍의 마개’가 떨어져나가게 했어요.
그 바람에 포도주 통 하나가 줄줄 다 새 버렸어요. 마부는 이 사실을 몰랐어요.
하지만 어쩌다 뒤를 돌아본 마부가 마차에서 뭔가가 새고 있는 걸 보곤 포도주 통을 살펴보니 둘 중 한 통의 포도주가 완전히 비어있지 뭐예요.
“나 같이 불행한 놈도 없어.”라며 마부가 외쳤어요.
“아직 더 불행해져야 해요.”라며 참새가 말하더니 말들 중 한 마리의 머리로 날아가더니 눈을 콕 쪼아냈어요.
마부가 이 광경에 깜짝 놀라 도끼를 들고 달려가 참새를 내려찢다 그만 참새를 공중으로 달아나버리고 애꿎은 말만 쓰러져 죽고 말았어요.
“오, 정말 나 같이 불행한 놈도 없어.”라며 마부가 외쳤어요.
“아뇨, 아직 더 불행해져야 해요.”라며 참새가 말했어요.
마부는 남은 두 마리 말로 마차를 끌고 출발했어요.
그러자 참새가 다시 마차의 덮개 아래로 기어들어가, 두 번째 포도주 통의 ‘구멍 마개’를 쪼아 포도주가 줄줄 새고 말았어요.
마부가 이걸 발견하곤 다시 소리쳤어요.
“오, 정말 나 같이 불행한 놈도 없을 거야.”
그러자 참새가 대꾸했어요.
“아니라니까요, 더 불행해지셔야 해요.”
참새가 두 번째 말의 머리에 앉더니 두 눈알을 콕 쪼아냈어요.
마부가 달려와 도끼를 높이 치켜들고 세게 내려찢었지만, 참새는 공중으로 날아가버리고 애꿎은 말만 도끼에 맞아 쓰러져 죽고 말았어요.
“오, 나 같이 불행한 놈도 정말 없얼 거야.”
“아니라니까요, 더 불행해지셔야 된다고요.”라며 참새가 말하더니, 이번엔 세 번째 말의 머리로 사뿐히 내려앉아 두 눈알을 콕 쪼아내 버렸어요.
머리 꼭대기까지 화가 난 마부가 보시고 자시고 할 것도 없이 참새를 상대로 도끼를 마구 휘둘러대는 바람에 참새는 한 방도 맞지 않고 애꿎은 세 번째 말만 죽임을 당하고 말았어요.
“오, 나 같이 불행한 놈도 정말 없을 거야.”라며 마부가 소리쳤지요.
“아니요, 더 불행해지셔야 돼요.”라며 참새가 대답했어요. “이제부턴 제가 당신 집에도 불운을 가져다 드릴 거거든요.”라는 말을 남기고 참새는 날아가 버렸어요.
마부는 마차를 그냥 남겨두고 화를 풀풀 해며 불만 가득 집으로 돌아왔어요.
“아,”라며 그가 아내에게 말했어요. “정말 운도 없지! 포도주 통들이 죄다 줄줄 새고, 말들이 셋 다 죽었지 뭐야!”
“아아, 여보,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “지금 그게 문제가 아니에요, 집안에 무슨 회개 망측한 일이 벌어지고 있나 보세요! 세상에 있는 새들은 모두 여기로 모여들어 우리 곡식들을 죄다 주워 먹고 있단 말예요!”
그가 위층으로 가보니 수천의 수천 마리의 새들이 다락방에 앉아 열심히 곡식을 죄다 쪼아 먹고 있었어요.
그 새들의 한 가운데에 바로 그 망할 놈의 참새가 앉아 있었고 말이에요.
그러자 마부가 소리쳤어요. “오, 나 같이 불행한 놈도 정말 없다니까?”
“아뇨, 아직 더 불행해지시려면 한 참 남았거든요!”라며 참새가 대답했어요. “마부님, 전 당신 목숨도 내놓게 하고 말 거예요.”라는 말을 남기곤 참새가 날아가 버렸어요.
그리하여 마부는 전 재산을 쫄딱 잃고 말았지요. 
그가 아래층 방으로 내려와 난로 뒤에 앉아 분노로 사무쳐하고 있는데. 
참새가 창문 앞에 앉아 큰소리로 외쳤어요.
“마부님, 제가 당신의 목숨을 내놓게 하고 말 거예요.”
그러자 마부가 냅다 도끼를 꼬나들곤 잽싸게 그 참새를 향해 내던졌지만, 창문만 와장창 다 깨지고 참새를 깃털하나 건드리지 못했어요.
 참새가 이제는 방안으로 폴짝 뛰어 들어오더니 난로 위에 자리를 잡고 앉아 노래를 불렀어요.
“마부님, 제가 당신의 목숨을 내놓게 하고 말 거랍니다.”
마부는 짜증이 나 완전히 꼭지가 돌고 말아 냉큼 그 난로를 두 동강이로 박살내고 말았어요.
그렇게 참새는 방안 여기저기로 날아서 도망 다녔고, 그래서 마부는 도끼를 휘둘러 자신의 집 내부 가구들을 몽땅 아주 그냥 박살을 내고 말았어요.
거울이며, 긴 의자들이며, 식탁이며, 최종적으로는 집안의 벽들까지 죄다 박살을 내며 마부가 자신의 도끼를 닫치는 대로 참새는 깃털 하나 다치지 않고 애꿎은 가구들만 박살이 난 거예요.
하지만 뭐든 결국엔 꼬리가 잡히는 법.
참새가 마부의 손에 붙잡히고 말았답니다.
그러자 아내가 말했지요.
“죽이게요?”
“아니,”라며 마부가 말했어요. “그건 너무 자비로워. 내 이 놈에게 훨씬 더 잔인한 맛을 보여줄 테야.”
그러면서 마부는 참새를 산채로 꿀꺽 삼켜버리고 말았어요. 
하지만 참새는 그의 몸 안에서도 이리저리 날갯짓을 치기 시작하더니 기어이 그의 입까지 기어 나와 다시 파닥파닥 거리기 시작했어요.
참새가 그의 입 밖으로 목을 쭉 내밀며 소리쳤어요.
“마부님, 제가 당신 목숨을 내놓게 하고 말 거라니까요.”
마부가 도끼를 아내에게 건네주며 말했어요.
“여보 마누라, 내 입에 있는 이 새를 사정없이 내려치구려, 나를 위해.”
여자가 내려쳤지만, 아뿔싸 도끼질이 빗나가 마부의 머리가 정통으로 찍히고 말았어요.
그 바람에 마부는 즉사해 쓰러졌어요.
하지만 그 참새는 훨훨 날아가 버리고 말았답니다. 

(동화 끝)

동화 「개와 참새」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「개와 참새」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter58.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



59. 프레드릭과 캐서린 (프리더와 카터리스헨)
(‘프레드릭’과 ‘캐서린’은 영어식 이름임. 
독일어 이름→‘프리더’와 ‘카터리스헨’)




옛날에 ‘프레드릭’이라고 불리는 남자와, ‘캐서린’이라고 불리는 여자가 젊어서 서로 결혼하여 함께 살고 있었어요.
어느 날 프레드릭이 말했어요.
“나는 가서 밭을 갈 테니, 캐서린 당신은 집에 남아, 내가 배고플 때 먹게 고기를 좀 구워놓고 목마를 때 마실 신선한 맥주나 한 잔 따라놔 봐.”
“응 그럴게, 프레드릭,”라며 ‘케이트’(캐서린을 귀엽게 부른 애칭)가 대답했어요. “바로 준비해 놓을 게.”
점심시간이 가까워지자, 그녀가 굴뚝에서 소시지를 하나 꺼내 프라이팬에 담고 버터를 조금 넣어 불에 올려놓았어요.
소시지가 구워지며 지글지글 소리를 내기 시작했지요.
프라이팬을 손에 쥐고서 옆에 서 있던 그녀가 이런 저런 생각을 했어요.
그러다 문득 머릿속에 떠오른 게 있었어요.
‘소시지를 굽는 동안, 지하 저장실로 가서 맥주를 따를 수 있겠는데.’
그래서 그녀가 프라이팬을 불 위에 얌전히 놓고 컵을 하나 쥐곤 지하 저장실로 가 맥주를 따랐어요.
맥주가 졸졸 컵에 담기는 걸 보고 있던 케이트(=캐서린)가 문득 생각했어요.
‘오, 이런! 위층의 개를 묶어두지 않았잖아, 프라이팬에서 소시지를 집어먹었겠는 걸. 내가 이럴 때가 아니지.’
그녀가 순식간에 지하실 계단을 다시 밟고 올라가 보니, ‘스피츠’(영리한 흰색 개. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/oE50Tm )가 이미 한입가득 소시지를 물고서 마당으로 도망을 치고 있지 뭐예요.
바보가 아니었던 케서린이 냉큼 뒤쫓아 갔어요.
그녀는 한참을 뒤쫓다 들판까지 쫓아갔죠.
하지만 멍멍이는 캐서린보다 더 재빨라 그냥 간단히는 소시지를 포기할 기세가 아니었어요, 그러다 밭‘고랑’(움푹 들어간 부분)들 사이로 쏙 숨어버렸지요.
“에게 어디로 간 거지!”라며 케이트가 사방을 돌아보며 말했어요. 
하지만 이미 너무 많이 달려 지칠 때로 지친 그녀가 조용히 그러면서도 차분히 걸어 땀을 식으며 돌아왔지.
물론 그러는 사이 통에 든 맥주가 졸졸 다 새고 있었지만요. 왜냐면 케이트가 꼭지를 돌려놓지 않고 나왔거든요.
컵에 맥주가 가득 차 더 담을 데가 없자, 맥주는 지하 저장실로 넘치기 시작해 통이 완전히 빌 때까지 졸졸 샜어요.
케이트가 지하 저장실 발판에 딛고 서서 보니 이 참사가 눈에 들어오지 뭐예요.
“이런, 야단났군!”라며 그녀가 소리쳤어요. “프레드릭(남편이름)이 그것을 알지 못하게 하려면 지금 내가 뭘 해야 해지!”
그녀가 잠시 생각했어요. 그녀가 마침내 다락방에 쌓아둔 최고급 밀가루가 담긴 자루를 기억해냈어요. 그건 지난 ‘장’(시골에서 정기적으로 열리는 시장. 5일‘장’) 때 사다 둔 거였지요.
그녀가 밀가루가 담긴 자루를 아래로 가져와 맥주 위에 흩뿌렸어요.
“그래,”라며 그녀가 말했지요. “두었다가 뭐하겠어, 필요할 때 써야지.”
그러면서 그녀는 다락방으로 다시 올라가 자루를 하나 더 가져와 맥주 컵 위로 던졌다 그만 컵을 부딪쳐 넘어지는 바람에, 그나마 프레드릭이 마실 맥주까지도 지하 저장실에 엎질러지고 말았어요.
“괜찮아,”라며 케이트가 말했어요. “하나라도 마무리 지으면 돼.”
그러면서 그녀는 지하 저장실에다 밀가루들을 죄다 흩뿌려버렸어요. 
그러고 나서야 그녀는 자신이 한 일이 무척 만족스러워져 말했어요.
“이제야 좀 깨끗해졌네!”
낮12시가 되자, 프레드릭이 집으로 돌아왔어요.
“여보, 음식은 준비 됐어?”
“아, 프레디(남자이름 프레드릭을 귀엽게 부른 애칭),”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “소시지 하나를 굽고 있었는데 내가 잠시 맥주 따르러 간 사이에 개가 프라이팬에서 그걸 집어갔지 뭐야 그래서 멍멍이를 뒤쫓다 와 보니 맥주가 다 쏟아져 내가 바닥을 말리려 맥주 위에 밀가루를 붓다 컵까지 엎지르는 바람에, 하지만 걱정 마, 지금 지하실 바닥은 아주 깨끗하게 다 말랐으니까.” 
프레드릭이 말했어요. 
“케이트(캐서린을 귀엽게 부른 이름), 케이트, 그럼 안 되지! 소시지 빼앗기고, 맥주 다 쏟고, 그 비싼 밀가루까지 바닥에 다 쏟으면 어떡해!”
“프레드릭, 정말, 전 몰랐어요, 당신이 미리 좀 말씀을 해주시지 그랬어요.”
남자가 생각했어요.
‘이런 마누라라면, 다음부터라도 잘 살펴야겠어.’
남편은 그동안 모은 상당한 양의 은화를 금으로 바꾼 다음 캐서린에게 말했어요.
“자 봐둬, 이건 나중에 정말 필요할 때 써야하니까. 일단 항아리에 담아 여기 가축우리 젖소 여물통 아래에 파묻어둘 테니까. 당신은 여기 얼씬도 하면 안 돼, 이건 정말 필요할 때 사용해야한다고.”
그녀가 말했어요.
“오, 네, 프레드릭, 절대 얼씬도 하지 않을 게요.”
프레드릭이 외출한 사이, 몇몇 ‘행상인’(물건을 들고 돌아다니며 파는 상인)들이 값싼 ‘토기’(흙으로 만든 그릇)와 그릇들을 머리에 이고 마을로 와, 이 젊은 여인(캐서린)에게 “구입하실 의향이 있으신지?”를 물었어요.
“오, 안 돼요,”라며 캐서린이 말했어요. “전 돈이 한 푼도 없어 아무 것도 살 수 없어요. 다만 당신들이 노란색 화폐를 사용하신다면 그럼 그 물건을 제가 살 게요.”
“뭔 말이죠? 노란색 화폐라니요? 어디 일단 한 번 봅시다요.”
“저기 가축우리 젖소 여물통 아래를 파보세요, 그럼 노란색 화폐들이 나올 거예요. 전 거기 들어가선 안 되거든요.” 
행상인(=상인)으로 변장한 그 악당들이 거기로 가 파 보니 순금 덩어리가 나왔어요.
그러자 그들이 그걸 들고 튀어버렸어요. 원래 팔려고 했던 토기와 그릇들은 그 집에 그냥 둔 채로 말이죠.
캐서린은 새로운 물건은 얼른 사용해야한다는 주의자였어요. 그런데 지지리도 복도 없게도 부엌엔 이 새 그릇들을 놓은 공간이 부족하지 뭐예요.
그래서 새 그릇들 모두를 그릇 밑바닥을 두드려 구멍을 낸 다음, 집 주변에 박힌 말뚝들 위에 장식으로 그 새 그릇들을 죄다 꽂아두었지요.
프레드릭이 집에 돌아와 이 새 인테리어장식물들을 보곤 말했어요.
“캐서린, 이게 다 어디서 난 거야?”
“응, 샀어, 프레드릭, 젖소 여물통 아래에 있는 화폐들을 줬거든. 난 거기 안 들어갔어, 행상인(상인)들이 알아서 그길 판 거라고요.”
“아이고, 이 마누라야,”라며 프레드릭이 말했어요. “당신 지금 뭔 짓을 한 줄이나 알아? 그건 화폐가 아냐, 순금덩어리라고, 우리 전 재산이란 말이야. 당신 어떻게 그럴 수 있어.”
“정말요, 프레드릭,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “전 정말 몰랐어요, 그럼 미리 제게 귀띔을 해줬어야지요.”
캐서린이 잠시 선 채로 생각에 잠기더니 이윽고 말했어요.
“들어봐, 프레드릭, 우린 곧 그 금을 되찾을 거야, 우리가 도둑들을 뒤쫓아 갈 테니까, 그치.”
“자, 어서,”라며 프레드릭이 말했어요. “이르고 있을 틈이 없어, 당장 뒤쫓아 가야 하니, 가는 도중 먹게 얼른 버터와 치즈를 챙겨.”
그들이 출발했어요.
프레드릭이 걸음이 더 빠르다 보니, 캐서린이 뒤에서 그를 뒤쫓아 와야 했어요.
‘약간 뒤쳐져서 가는 게,’라며 그녀가 생각했어요. ‘집으로 되돌아갈 땐 이점이 될 수 있어.’
그녀가 언덕에 도착했을 때, 길 양 옆으로 깊은 바퀴자국 흔적들이 나 있었지요.
“저거 좀 봐,”라며 캐서린이 말했어요. “어쩜 저리도 깊게 피부가 찢기고 골(틈)이 났을까, 한동안은 절대 아물 거 같지 않은데.”
진심으로 마음이 아팠던 그녀가 버터를 꺼내 길 왼쪽과 오른쪽에 있는 바퀴자국 흔적을 버터로 발라 틈을 메꾸어주었어요.
그렇게 하면 다신 바퀴에 상처를 입을 거 같지 않았거든요.
그런데 그런 자선행위를 하려니 몸을 구부려야 했고 그 바람에 그녀의 호주머니에 있던 치즈가 쏙 빠져나와 언덕 아래로 데굴데굴 굴러 내려가고 말았어요.
캐서린이 말했어요.
“여기까지 올라왔는데, 다시 내려가진 못하겠고, 그렇담 다른 애(=버터)를 내려 보내 다시 데리고 오게 해야겠다.”
그녀가 다른 치즈를 꺼내 아래로 데굴데굴 굴러 보냈어요.
하지만 그 치즈는 영 돌아올 마음이 없어 보였어요. 그래서 그녀가 세 번째 친구를 데굴데굴 아래로 굴러 보내며 생각했어요.
‘아마도 먼저 보낸 애는 친구를 기다리나 보네, 혼자 오긴 싫은가 봐, 그렇담 이 애를 굴러 보내야지.’
셋 다를 이렇게 굴러 내려 보낸 그녀가 말했어요.
‘이럴 리가 없는데, 아마 세 번째 굴러 보낸 애가 길을 잃었나봐. 그럼 다시 불러오게 네 번째 애를 굴러 보내야지.’
하지만 네 번째 애도 세 번째 애와 별반 다르지 않았지요, 감감무소식이었거든요.
그러자 캐서린이 화가 단단히 나, 막무가내 식으로 다섯 번째 애와 여섯 번째 애를 언덕 아래로 굴러 보냈지요. 이 애들이 가지고 간 버터 전부였어요.
버터 친구들이 돌아오기만 기다리며 한참을 바라보고 서 있던 그녀는, 아무래도 그들 아무도 오지 않을 거 같자, 말했어요.
“오, 너희들 정말 운 좋은 줄 알아, 멀리 도망 가봤자 너희가 얼마나 갔겠니! 그럼 뭐 내가 너희를 천년만년 기다려줄 거 같니? 난 내 길을 계속 갈 거야, 그러니 너희들이 나를 뒤쫓아 와야 해, 그 짧은 다리로 잘도 날 따라오겠다.”
캐서린이 성큼성큼 걸어 프레드릭에게로 갔어요. 
프레드릭은 뭘 좀 먹고 싶어 그녀를 기다리며 서 있었죠.
“당신이 가지고 온 걸 좀 먹고 보자 여보.”라며 그가 말했어요.
그녀가 ‘버터를 바르지 않은 빵’을 그에게 건넸어요.
“버터와 치즈는 어딨고?”라며 그 남자가 물었어요.
“아, 프레디(프레드릭을 귀엽게 부른 애칭임),”라며 캐서린이 말했어요. “버터는 마차 바퀴 자국에 메꾸어 넣었고, 치즈들은 곧 올 거야. 한 애가 내게서 도망치길래, 그래서 내가 다른 얘들을 데려오라고 굴러 보냈거든.”
프레드릭이 말했어요. “그러면 어떡해, 캐서린, 버터를 길에 쳐 바르고 그 아까운 치즈를 언덕 아래로 굴러 보내다니!” 
“정말요, 프레드릭, 그럼 제게 귀띔을 해줬어야지요.”
그래서 그들은 어쩔 수 없이 ‘버터를 바르지 않은 빵’을 함께 나눠 먹었답니다.
프레드릭이 말했지요.
“캐서린, 집에서 나올 때 문단속을 제대로 했겠지?”
“아뇨, 프레드릭, 미리 말씀을 하시지 그랬어요.”
“당장 집에 가봐, 우리가 더 멀리 가기 전에 문단속부터 확인하고 오라고, 그리고 가는 김에 먹을 거도 좀 더 들고 오고. 나는 여기서 당신을 기다릴 테니.”
캐서린이 집으로 돌아가며 생각했어요.
‘프레드릭이 더 먹고 싶다 그랬지, 버터와 치즈는 안 좋아하는 거 같고, 그렇담 손수건 하나에 말린 배(먹는 배)들을 싸오자, 그가 마실 거로는 식초 ’한‘(=1) 주전자며 될 거야.’ 
그런 다음 그녀가 ‘현관 문’ 위쪽 문을 ‘걸쇠’(ㄱ자 모양의 쇠)로 단단히 잠겼어요.
하지만 그녀는 ‘현관 문’ 아래쪽 문은 떼어내 등에 매었어요. 그녀는 믿었어요. 문단속을 단단히 하려면 들고 가는 게 가장 안전하다고요.
그 바람에 캐서린은 길에서 한참을 보냈어요. 
그녀가 생각했지요.
‘프레드릭(남편이름)이 이제 안심할 거야.’
남편에게 도착한 그녀가 말했어요.
“프레드릭, 여기 당신을 위해 문짝을 이고 왔어, 이제 당신은 문단속을 똑똑히 할 수 있어.”
“아이고 맙소사,”라며 그가 말했어요. “정말 똑똑한 마누라 납셨네! 위에만 걸쇠를 걸어두고 아래쪽 문짝을 이딴 식으로 뜯어오면 뭘 어쩌란 거야. 하지만 이제 집으로 돌아가긴 너무 늦었으니 그냥 그건 당신이 이고 가기로 해. 참 멀리도 들고 가겠다.”
“응 들고 가볼게, 프레드릭, 하지만 이 ‘말린 배들’과 식초 주전자까지 내가 들려니 너무 무거운 걸, 뭐 일단 이것들도 문 위에 얹고 가 볼게.”
그들은 숲에 들어가 그 악당들을 찾아보았지만 발견하지 못했어요.
마침내 날도 더 저물고 해서 그들이 나무 위에 올라가 거기서 그날 밤을 보내기로 결심했어요.
하지만 그들이 나무 꼭대기에 앉자마자, 악당들이 훔친 물건들을 들고 거기로 왔어요. 그 물건들 중에는 그들 부부에게서 훔친 금도 있었지요.
악당들은, 프레드릭과 캐서린이 앉아 있는 바로 그 나무 아래에 쭈그리고 앉아 모닥불을 피운 다음 약탈품들을 막 나누려고 하고 있었어요.
프레드릭(남편이름)이 뒤로 해서 기어 내려와 돌멩이들을 주워모은 다음 다시 올라갔어요. 도둑들에게 그 돌멩이들을 던져 죽일 참이었죠.
하지만 그는 돌멩이로 그들을 맞추지 못했어요.
악당들이 소리쳤어요.
“얼씨구 벌써 아침이 되려나, 바람 때문에 ‘전나무’(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/uT0nT7 )가 흔들리는데.”
여전히 등에 문짝을 이고 있던 캐서린은 문짝이 너무도 무거워 문짝 위에 있던 ‘말린 배들’이라도 버릴 참이었어요. 
그래서 그녀가 말했지요.
“프레드릭, 나 이 배들 좀 아래로 던지면 안 돼.”
“안 돼, 캐서린, 지금은 그럴 때가 아니라고.”라며 그가 대꾸했어요. “도둑들이 금방 발각되고 말 거야.”
“오, 하지만, 프레드릭, 나 너무 무거워! 안 버리면 내가 떨어질 정도라고.”
“해, 그럼, 빌어먹을!”
그리하여 ‘말린 배들’이 나뭇가지들에 툭툭 걸리며 아래로 내려갔어요.
아래에 있던 악당들이 말했지요.
“나뭇잎들이 떨어지네.”
잠시 후 그래도 여전히 문짝이 너무도 무거운 캐서린이 말했어요.
“아, 프레드릭(남편이름), 나 이 ‘식초 주전자’ 좀 비우면 안 돼.”
“안 돼, 캐서린(아내이름), 정말 안 된다고, 들킨단 말이야.”
“아, 하지만, 프레드릭, 나 정말 이게 너무 무거워서 그래.”
“그럼 비워, 젠장 할!”
그래서 그녀가 식초를 비웠어요. 그 바람에 식초가 도둑들 위로 흩뿌려졌어요.
도둑들이 식초를 비처럼 맞으며 말했어요.
“얼씨구 벌써 이슬이 맺히네.”
결국 캐서린은 생각했어요.
‘이 문짝을 안 버렸다간 내가 떨어지고 말겠는 걸?’
그녀가 말했지요.
“프레드릭, 나 이 문짝 던진다.”
“안 돼, 지금은 안 된다고, 캐서린, 금방 들킨단 말이야.”
“오, 하지만, 프레드릭, 나 정말 무거워서 내가 떨어지겠단 말이야.”
“오, 그래도 안 돼, 캐서린, 그것만은 안 돼, 꼭 붙들고 있으라고.”
“아, 프레드릭, 나 정말 떨어지겠단 말이야!”
“그럼, 그렇게 해, 젠장 맞을!”
그 순간 문짝이 덜커덕덜커덕하는 굉음을 내며 아래로 떨어졌어요.
아래에 있던 도둑들이 벌떡 일어나며 소리 질렸어요.
“아이고 나무에서 악마가 내려오나 봐!”
그들은 훔친 물건들을 그대로 두고서 줄행랑을 쳐버렸어요.
다음날 아침 일찍, 두 사람이 내려와 자신들의 금을 다시 찾아 집으로 가져왔어요.
그들이 다시 한 번 집에 도착했을 때, 프레드릭이 말했어요.
“자 이제부턴, 캐서린, 당신도 부지런히 일해야 해.”
“응, 프레드릭, 나 꼭 그럴게, 나도 들판으로 가서 곡식을 벨게.”
캐서린이 들판에 들어갔을 때, 그녀가 혼잣말로 말했어요.
“먼저 베고 먹을까, 아님 먹고 벨까? 오 그래, 먼저 먹고 베자.”
그래서 캐서린이 가지고 간 음식을 먹었어요.
그런데 먹고 나니 졸린 거예요. 그래도 곡식을 베는데 반쯤 자면서 베다 보니 옷이며 앞치마며 웃옷이며 ‘시프트 드레스’(간단한 원피스. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/CyTm7L )이 갈기갈기 잘리고 말았어요.
한참을 자던 캐서린이 다시 깨어나 보니 그녀는 거기에 반쯤 벌거벗은 채 서 있었어요.
그녀가 혼잣말로 속삭였어요.
“이게 난가, 아님 내가 아닌가? 아아, 내가 아닌가봐.”
그러는 동안 어둠이 깔렸어요.
캐설린이 마을로 달려와 남편이 있는 창문을 두드리며 소리쳤어요.
“프레드릭.”
“무슨 일이오?”
“캐서린 안에 있나요?”
“그렇소, 있소.”라며 프레드릭이 대꾸했어요. “안에서 자고 있소.”
그녀가 말했어요. 
“아이 잘 됐네, 내가 벌써 들어와 자고 있데.”
그래서 그녀는 달아났어요. 
밖에서 캐서린은 막 도둑질을 하려는 몇몇 깡패들을 발견했어요.
그때 그녀가 그들에게 가더니 말했지요.
“내가 당신들이 훔치는 걸 도와드릴게요.”
악당들은 그녀가 이곳 지리를 잘 아니 썩 도움이 될 거라 생각했어요.
캐서린이 집들 앞으로 가더니 소리쳤어요.
“마을사람들, 훔칠 만한 게 있나요? 저희들이 지금 막 훔칠 참이거든요.”
도둑들이 속으로 생각했어요.
“다 글렀군.”
그래서 그들은 캐서린을 떼어놓고 싶어졌어요.
그때 그들이 그녀에게 말했지요.
“마을 밖에, 목사님이 순무(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/9Bmhtv ) 밭을 좀 가지고 있어. 거리로 가 우리를 위해 순무 몇 개만 뽑아다 줘.”
캐서린이 그 밭으로 가 순무를 뽑기 시작했어요.
하지만 원체 게으른 탓에 금방 실증이 나 몇 개 모으지도 못했는데.
때마침 지나가던 남자 한 명이, 서 있는 그녀를 보았지요.
남자는 그게 순무들 사이에서 순무를 뿌리째 뽑고 있는 악마라고 여겼어요.
그래서 그가 마을로 달려가 목사님에게 가 말씀드렸어요.
“아이고, 목사님요, 큰일 났습니다요, 당신 순무밭에 지금 악마가 순무들을 뿌리째 뽑고 있습니다요.”
“오, 주여,”라며 목사님이 대답하셨어요. “어쩐다지? 난 다리 한 쪽을 절기 때문에 거기까지 갈 수도 없거니와 악마를 물리칠 수도 없을 텐데.”
그러자 남자가 말했어요. 
“그럼 제가 등에 업고 가드리지요.”
그리하여 그가 목사님을 등에 업고 거리로 갔어요.
그들이 그 장소에 도착했을 때, 캐서린이 막 자리에서 일어나며 등을 꼿꼿이 세웠어요.
“에구머니나, 진짜 악마네!”라며 목사님이 소리쳤어요.
그리곤 두 남자 다 줄행랑을 쳐버렸지요.
목사님은 어찌나 죽을 둥 살 둥으로 놀랐던지 절뚝거리는 발로 뛰면서도, 자신을 등에 업고 온 사지 멀쩡한 남자보다도 훨씬 잘 뛰었다네요.

(동화 끝)

동화 「프레드릭과 캐서린(프리더와 카터리스헨)」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「프레드릭과 캐서린(프리더와 카터리스헨)」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter59.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



60. 두 형제



옛날 옛적에 두 형제가 살았어요.
형은 부자이고, 동생은 가난했어요.
부자 형은 금세공인(금은방주인?)이었는데 마음이 사악했어요.
가난한 동생은 빗자루 만드는 일로 먹고 살았는데, 마음씨가 착하고 훌륭했지요.
가난한 동생에겐 두 아들이 있었어요. 쌍둥이 형제였답니다. 서로 어찌나 닮았던지 물방울 두 개 같이 닮았지 뭐예요.
두 소년은 부자 집을 들락거리며 종종 먹다 남은 음식들을 구해왔어요.
한 번은 가난한 동생(두 소년의 아버지)이 ‘베어 낸 작은 나뭇가지’를 주우러 숲에 들어갔는데, 행운인지 황금빛을 한 아름다운 새 한 마리가 보이지 뭐예요.
그가 작은 돌멩이를 주워 그 새에게 던졌어요.
운이 좋아 돌멩이가 새를 맞히긴 했지만 황금 깃털 하나만 떨어뜨리곤 그 새를 유유히 날아가 버렸답니다.
남자가 그 깃털을 주워 형에게 가져갔어요. 
형이 살펴보더니 말했어요.
“음, 이거 순금인걸!”
그러면서 동생에게 상당히 많은 돈을 주었어요.
다음날 동생이 ‘자작나무’(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/6l19To )에 올라가 나뭇가지 두서너 개를 막 잘라내려는데 어제 그 새가 푸드덕 날아가지 뭐예요.
그래서 남자가 살펴보니 새의 ‘둥우리’(집)가 있고 그 안에 알 하나가 있는 거예요. 황금빛 알 말이에요.
그가 그 알을 집으로 주워와 형에게 가져갔더니, 형이 다시 말했어요.
“진짜 금인데 이거.”
그러면서 형은 그에게 그 값을 주웠어요.
마침내 그 금세공인(금은방주인?)이 말했어요.
“그 새 자체를 정말 가졌음 하는데.” 
가난한 동생이 세 번째로 그 숲으로 들어갔더니, 황금 새가 똑같은 나무에 앉아 있지 뭐예요. 그래서 그는 돌 하나를 집어던져 새를 떨어뜨리곤 그걸 형에게로 가져다주었어요.
형이 그에게 금화를 수북이 주었어요.
“이제 살만하겠다.”라며 동생이 만족해하며 집으로 왔어요.
그 금세공인은 간악하고 교활해, 그 새의 비밀을 간파하고 있었지요.
그가 냉큼 아내를 부르며 말했어요.
“내가 먹게 이 황금새 좀 구워봐. 아무도 손도 못 대고 조심해서 구워. 나 혼자 다 먹어치울 테니까.”
맞아요, 그 새는 흔한 새가 아니었어요. 누구든 그 새의 심장과 간을 먹는 사람은 매일 아침 자신이 베고 잔 베개 밑에서 금화가 하나씩 나오는 놀라운 종류의 새였어요.
여자가 새 요리를 준비한 다음, 고기 굽는 쇠꼬챙이에 꽂아, 그것을 굽기 시작했어요. 
새가 불에 구워지는 동안 때마침 아내가 다른 집안 볼일 때문에 부엌을 나가야했어요.
그때 우연히도 빗자루를 만드는 가난한 동생의 두 아들들이 부엌으로 뛰어 들어왔는데, 고기 굽는 쇠꼬챙이 옆에 서 있다 쇠꼬챙이를 한두 번 돌려보았지요.
바로 그 순간 새고기 작은 두 조각이 기름통 속에 쏙 하고 빠졌어요.
두 소년 중 하나가 말했어요.
“이 작은 두 조각 우리가 먹자. 나 너무 배고파, 떨어진 건데 뭐 어때.”
그래서 두 소년이 고기 두 조각을 먹었어요.
하지만 부엌에 다시 들어온 여인이 그들이 뭔가 먹고 있는 걸 보고 말했어요.
“너희들 지금 뭐 먹고 있니?”
“새에게서 떨어진 고기 두 조각이요.”라며 그들이 대답했어요.
“에구머니나, 아무래도 심장과 간인 모양이구나.”라며 여인이 화들짝 놀라며 말했어요.
여자는 그게 없어진 줄 알면 남편이 화낼게 분명해, 급히 어린 수탉을 죽여 심장과 간을 꺼내 황금새 옆에 붙였어요. 
준비를 다 마친, 여자가 그걸 금세공인에게 가져다주었고, 그는 아무지게도 알차게 먹어치웠답니다. 하나도 남김없이 말이죠.
하지만 다음날 아침이 되어 그가 자기 베개 밑에 손을 집어넣어보았지만 있을 거라 생각한 금화 한 닢은 없었지요. 그날만 그런 게 아니라 이후로도 쭉 베개 밑에서 금화는 생기지 않았어요.
나쁜 형이 잃어버린 그 금화의 행운이 자신들에게 배당된 것을 두 아이는 알 리가 없었어요.
다음날 아침 그들이 일어나보니 바닥에서 뭔가가 짤랑 거리는 거예요, 그래서 그들이 그걸 집어 보니 아니 금화 두 닢이지 않겠어요!
그들이 즉시 아빠에게로 가져갔어요.
아빠가 깜짝 놀라며 말했어요.
“이게 어찌된 일이냐?”
다음날도 그들이 금화 두 닢을 주워왔어요. 그 후 계속 그랬답니다.
안 되겠다 싶었던, 동생이 형에게 가 이 이상한 일을 털어놓았어요.
금세공인(나쁜 형)은 단번에 그게 어찌된 일인지 알아차렸어요.
즉 그 아이들이, 자신이 먹기로 되어 있던 황금새의 심장과 간을 먹은 거지요.
형은 앙갚음을 하고 싶었어요. 왜냐면 형은 질투심이 많고 몰인정한 사람이었거든요.
형이 아이들 아빠인 동생에게 말했어요.
“아무래도 네 아이들에게 악마가 씐 거 같다. 금화 때문에 생고생하지 않으려면 아이들을 더는 네 집에 두지 마라. 안 그랬다가 악마에게 너까지 씌어 집안이 온통 파멸하고 말테니까.”
악마가 씐다는 말에 아빠(동생)가 벌벌 떨었어요. 
마음이 아팠지만 그는 어쩔 수 없이 쌍둥이를 숲에 데려간 다음 슬픈 마음을 뒤로 한 채 그들만 남겨두고 떠나버렸어요.
두 아이들은 숲을 이리저리 뛰어다니며 집으로 갈 방법을 찾아보았지만 모두 헛수고였어요.
길을 찾으러 돌아다니면 다닐수록 그들은 더 길을 잃고 마는 걸요.
마침내 그들이 어느 사냥꾼 하나와 마주칠 수 있었어요.
사냥꾼이 물었어요.
“너희들 아버님이 누구시냐?”
“저희들은 빗자루 만드는 사람의 불쌍한 아이들이에요.”라며 그들이 대답했어요.
그리고 자신들의 베개 밑에서 매일 아침 금화가 한 닢씩 생기는 바람에 아빠가 더는 자신들을 집에 두려하지 않고 싶어 하신다는 얘기도 그 사냥꾼에게 다 해드렸지요. 
“그렇담 따라 오너라,”라며 사냥꾼이 말했어요. “정직하게 행동하고 게으름을 피우지만 않겠다고 결심하면 이 일이 그리 나쁠 것도 없단다.”
착한 남자는 그 아이들이 마음에 들었어요. 게다가 자신에겐 자식이 없었거든요.
사냥꾼은 아이들을 집으로 데려와 말했어요.
“이제부턴 내가 너희들의 아버지가 되어주마, 너희들이 클 때까지 보살펴주마.”
그들은 그 사냥꾼에게서 사냥하는 기술을 배웠어요, 그리고 그들이 깨어날 때마다 발견되는 금화는 나중에 그들(쌍둥이)이 필요할 때를 대비하려고 사냥꾼이 따로 보관하고 있었지요.
그들이 자라 이제 어른이 되었어요.
그들의 양아버지(사냥꾼)가 어느 날 그들을 데리고 숲으로 가더니 말했어요.
“오늘 너희들의 사격술을 시험해 보겠다. 그래서 합격이면 너희들의 도제교육(학생교육)도 끝이고 이제부터 너희들도 당당한 한 명의 사냥꾼이 되는 거다.”
그들은 양아버지와 함께 숨어서 기다렸어요. 아주 오래 기다렸지만 사냥감은 나타나지 않았지요.
하지만 위를 올려다본 사냥꾼(양아버지)의 눈에 야생 거위들이 삼각편대를 이루고서 날아가고 있는 게 들어왔어요.
그(사냥꾼)가 그들에게 말했어요.
“저기 양쪽 끝에서 가는 애들을 하나씩 쏘아 맞추거라.”
그가 성공했어요.
그리하여 그는 사격시험을 통과했어요.
곧이어 또 다른 새 떼 무리가 이번엔 숫자 2모양으로 날아가는 게 보였어요.
그러자 사냥꾼이 또 다른 애에게 “저기 양쪽 끝에서 가는 애들을 하나씩 쏘아 맞추거라.”라고 지시를 내렸고, 그 애는 마찬가지로 성공적으로 사격시험을 완수했어요.
“자 이제,”라며 양아버지가 말했어요. “너희들이 도제교육(학생교육)을 마치고 정식 사냥꾼이 되었음을 선포한다. 이제부턴 너희들도 한 명의 솜씨 좋고 당당한 사냥꾼들이다.” 
그런 까닭에 두 형제는 숲으로 함께 나갔고 거기서 서로 조언을 주고 받다보니 뭔가 그림(큰 뜻)을 그리게 되었지요.
밤이 되어 그들이 식사를 하러 자리에 앉았을 때, 그들이 양아버지께 말씀드렸어요.
“승낙해주실 때까지 물 한 모금 입 한 모금 대지 않겠습니다.”
그래서 그가 말했지요.
“그래 무슨 부탁이라도 있는 게냐?”
그들이 대답했어요.
“저희들의 배움도 끝났으니 세상에 한 번 나가 스스로를 입증해보이고 싶습니다. 저희가 여길 떠나 여행길에 오르는 걸 허락해주십시오.”
그러자 노인이 흔쾌히 얘기했어요.
“용감한 사냥꾼들이 다 되었구나, 좋다, 내 너희들의 바람을 들어주마. 함께 서로 의지하며 잘 해쳐나가 보아라.”
그 즉시 그들이 함께 맛있게 먹고 맛있게 마시며 식사를 하였답니다.
떠날 날이 되자, 양아버지가 그들 각각에게 좋은 총 한 자루와 개 한 마리를 주며, 필요하면 그동안 그들 대신 모아놨던 금화들도 가져가라 말했어요. 
그럼 다음 그는 멀리까지 마중 나와 그들을 배웅했어요.
작별인사를 할 때, 그가 광채나는 칼 한 자루를 주며 말했지요.
“서로 떨어지거든, 이 칼을 헤어지는 장소에 있는 나무에 꼽아놓거라. 그러다 나중에 둘 중 하나라도 다시 거길 들르게 되면 헤어진 형제가 어찌 지내고 있는지 칼의 한쪽 면(한쪽 면 이 각각 형제들의 생명을 상징함)을 보고 판별할 수 있을 게다. 만약 한쪽 면이 녹슬어 있음 죽은 것이요, 반대로 깨끗하면 그가 살아 있고 잘 지낸단 증거니라.”  
두 형제는 아주 먼 곳까지 함게 나아갔어요.
한 번은 너무도 울창한 나머지 도무지 하루 만에 다 빠져나갈 거 같지 않은 숲에 도착했지요.
그래서 그들의 그날 밤은 거기서 보내야 했어요.
그들이 사냥용 주머니들에 넣고 온 것을 다 먹었어요.
하지만 두 번째 날도 마찬가지고 온종일 걷기만 했지요.
가도 가도 끝이 없는 숲이었거든요.
먹을 게 정말 하나도 없자 그들 중 한 명이 말했어요.
“아무래도 여기서 사냥을 해서라도 배고픔을 참아야겠어.”
그들이 자신들의 총을 장전했어요(총알을 총에 넣음).
그들이 주변을 둘러보았죠.
그때 늙은 산토끼 한 마리가 그들 쪽으로 뛰어오고 있었어요, 그가 총으로 겨누자, 그 산토끼가 다급히 외쳤어요.
“친애하는 사냥꾼님, 저를 살려만 주신다면, 제가 당신께 두 어린 것들을 드리도록 할 게요.”
그러더니 깡충깡충 수풀 속으로 뛰어가더니 두 어린 새끼들을 안고 왔어요.
하지만 어린 것들이 너무도 해맑게 놀고 있는지라 예쁜 나머지 사냥꾼들이 그 애들을 죽일 마음이 나지 않았어요.
그리하여 산토끼의 새끼들이 깡충깡충 뒤따르면서 그들의 여행길에 동행하게 되었어요. 
오래 뒤에 이번엔 여우 한 마리가 기어서 지나가고 있었어요. 사냥꾼들이 총을 쏘려하자, 그 여우가 다급하게 외쳤어요.
“친애하는 사냥꾼님, 저를 살려주시면, 제 두 어린 새끼들을 드릴게요.”
여우(남자) 역시 두 어린 새끼를 데리고 왔어요.
사냥꾼들은 차마 그들을 죽이지 못했어요. 그래서 산토끼들과 함께 뒤따라오게 했어요. 그들이 뒤따라왔답니다.
머니 않아 이번엔 늑대 한 마리가 수풀에서 성큼성큼 걸어나오는 게 보였어요. 사냥꾼들이 총으로 맞추려고 하자, 그 늑대가 다급하게 소리쳤어요.
“친애하는 사냥꾼님, 저를 살려만 주시면, 저도 마찬가지로 두 어린 새끼들을 드릴게요.”
사냥꾼들이 그 두 늑대들도 다른 동물들 옆에 놓아주었어요. 그래서 그들이 사냥꾼들을 뒤따라왔답니다.
때마침 식사를 마치고 산보를 하러 나왔다가 사냥꾼들을 만난 곰이 외쳤어요.
“친애하는 사냥꾼님들, 저를 살려주시면, 저도 또한 두 어린 자식들을 드릴게요.”
두 어린 곰들도 다른 동물들 틈에 끼었어요. 이리하여 벌써 여덟 마리가 되었답니다.
그럼 다음으론 누가 왔을 까요?
네, 사자 한 마리가 갈기(머리털)를 흔들며 다가왔지요.
하지만 사냥꾼들은 이번엔 인정사정없이 총을 쏘려고 했지만, 그 사자 또한 다급하게 말하지 뭐예요.
“친애하는 사냥꾼님들, 저를 살려만 주시면, 저 또한 두 어린 것들을 드리도록 할게요.”
그리하여 사자가 두 새끼들을 사냥꾼에게 데려왔지요.
이제 사냥꾼들을 따르는 동물은 사나 두 마리, 곰 두 마리, 늑대 두 마리, 여우 두 마리, 산토끼 두 마리나 되었어요. 그들 동물 모두 사냥꾼들을 따르며 봉사했어요.
그러는 사이 그들의 배고픔이 가신 건 아니었어요.
그래서 그들이 여우들에게 말했어요.
“어이 여우 너, 재빠른 친구야, 우리에게 먹을 것도 구해와 봐. 넌 꾀 많은 동물이잖니.”  
여우들이 대답했어요.
“여기서 멀지 않은 곳에 마을이 하나 있어요. 그 마을은 저희들이 벌써 여러 번 닭들을 훔친 적이 있는 마을이라 거기까지 가는 길을 잘 안답니다.”
그리하여 여우들이 마을로 가 먹을 걸 좀 구해와 동물친구들에게 나눠주고 다시 여행을 출발했지요.
하지만 여우들이 워낙에 이 지역 지리를 잘 알았기 때문에, 어디에 새들의 보금자리가 있는지 등등을 사냥꾼들에게 금방금방 알려주었어요.
그들은 이제 이런 식으로 한동안 방랑을 하였답니다.
하지만 다함께 계속 움직일 수 없는 여건이 되자, 그들(두 형제)이 말했어요.
“이젠 어쩔 수 없어, 우리 따로 가자.”
그들은 동물들도 나누었어요.
그래서 두 형제 각각 사자 한 마리, 곰 한 마리, 늑대 한 마리, 여우 한 마리, 산토끼 한 마리씩 맡기로 하고 서로에게 작별인사를 한 후, 앞으로 죽는 순간까지 서로의 사랑을 확인하기로 약속하며, 양아버지께서 일찍이 주신 칼을 나무에 깊숙이 박았지요.
두 형제 중, 한 명은 동쪽으로 가고, 나머지 한 명은 서쪽을 향해 걸어갔어요.
하지만 동생(이 동화의 주인공임. 동생이 80% 주인공이고, 형이 20% 주인공이에요)이 자신의 동물친구들과 함께 어느 마을에 들어서니 온 건물에 ‘검은 띠’(=‘검은 크레이프’=‘죽음을 상징’)가 걸려있는 거예요.
그는 여인숙에 들어가, 주인장에게 “이 동물들이 머물만한 장소가 있나요?”라고 물었어요.
여인숙 주인이 그에게 벽에 구멍이 하나 나 있는 가축우리를 내주었어요.
그 구멍을 산토끼는 빠져나올 수 있어서 깡충 뛰어나가더니 양배추 머리를 가져와 먹었어요.
여우도 그 구멍으로 빠져나가 암탉 한 마리를 먹어치우고 왔어요. 여우는 그러고도 배가 안 차는지 냉큼 한 번 더 나가더니 이번엔 수탉을 먹어치우고 들어왔어요.
하지만 늑대와 곰과 사자는 너무 커서 그 구멍을 통과할 수 없었어요.
그러자 여인숙 주인이 그들을 데리고 잔디밭에 누워 있던 젖소 한 마리가 있는 곳으로 갔어요.
그 바람에 그들 동물들은 마음껏 배를 채울 수 있었답니다.
자신의 동물들이 자는 것을 본 사냥꾼이 여인숙 주인에게 “아니 이 마을엔 왜 검은 띠들이 걸려 있나?”고 물었어요.
주인장이 말하기를,
“공주님이 내일 죽기 때문입니다.”
사냥꾼은 “그럼 그녀가 무슨 죽을병이라도 걸린 거요?”라고 물었지요.
“아닙니다.”라며 주인장이 대답했어요. “아직 젊으시고 팔팔하신 걸요. 그럼에도 불구하고 죽을 수밖에 없으시죠!”
“아니 그건 또 왜요?”라며 사냥꾼(두 형제 중 동생. 주인공임)이 물었어요.
“이 마을 위엔 언덕이 하나 있는데, 무서운 용이 산답니다. 매년 처녀를 한 명씩 그 용에게 산채로 바치지 않음 그 용이 온 나라를 쑥대밭으로 만들기에 지금껏 처녀를 받치다 보니 나라 안에 있는 처녀란 처녀는 다 희생되고 이제 공주님 한 명 남으신 거죠. 불쌍하게도, 공주님도 용에게 받쳐져야 하니 참말로 딱하게 됐습니다. 그게 바로 내일인 거죠.”
사냥꾼이 말했어요.
“그럼 용을 죽이면 되잖소?”
“아,”라며 주인장이 대꾸했어요. “수많은 기사들이 시도해보았지만, 생목숨만 잃고 말았죠. 그 용을 죽이는 자에게 왕이 괜히 자기 딸을 주고 자기 사후엔(죽은 다음엔) 왕국까지 넘겨주겠다고 말한 게 아니라니까요.”
이에 대해 사냥꾼은 더는 아무 말을 하지 않았어요.
하지만 다음날 아침에 동물들을 데리고 용이 산다는 그 언덕으로 올랐어요.
언덕 꼭대기에 작은 교회가 하나 서 있었어요. 교회 안 ‘제단’(탁자) 위에 잔이 세 개 놓여 있는데 모두 가득 차 있었지요.
그 잔엔 이런 문구가 적혀 있었어요.
“이 잔을 비우는 누구든 지상 최강자가 되어 문지방(입구) 앞에 파묻은 검을 휘두를 수 있노라.” 
사냥꾼은 그 잔들을 마시지 않고 일단 밖으로 나가 땅속에서 검을 찾아보았어요.
하지만 검이 거기서 꿈쩍도 않는 거예요. 
그래서 그가 다시 안으로 들어가 잔들을 다 마신 다음 검을 집어들만큼 힘이 세지니 그제야 자유롭게 그 검을 휘둘를 수 있게 되었어요.
시간이 되자 처녀(공주)가 자신에게 딸린 시녀들과, 왕과, 장군(원문→육군 원수)과 함께 용에게로 인도될 장소로 왔어요. 
먼 곳에서 언덕 위에 있는 사냥꾼을 본 그녀는 그게 자신을 기다리고 있는 용일 거라 생각하고서 오지 않으려고 발버둥 쳤어요.
하지만 결국 온 마을들이 파괴될 수 있다는 말에 자포자기해 비참한 발걸음을 계속했지요.
왕과 시녀들은 슬픔을 가득안고 궁전으로 돌아갔어요. 
하지만 왕의 장군만은 먼 거리에서 선 채 상황을 지켜보고 있었지요.
공주 혼자서 언덕 꼭대기로 갔어요.
그런데 거기 서 있는 건 용이 아니라 젊은 사냥꾼이었어요.
그가 공주를 안심시키며 구해주겠다 말하더니 교회 안으로 데리고 들어가 문을 잠겼어요.
곧 일곱 개의 머리를 가진 용이 우레와 같은 굉음을 지르며 거기에 나타났어요.
용은 사냥꾼을 보더니 혀를 차며 말했어요.
“네 놈이 여기가 감히 어디라고 온 거냐?” 
사냥꾼이 대답했어요.
“너와 싸우기 위해서다.”
용이 말했어요.
“많은 기사들이 그 짓거리 하다 목숨을 잃었다. 네가 정 원하면 너마저도 저승으로 보내주지.”
용이 입으로 불을 내뿜었어요.
불이 마른 잔디밭에 금방 옮겨 붙어, 사냥꾼은 열기와 연기에 숨이 막혀 죽을 지경이었어요.
하지만 그때 그의 동물친구들이 온 몸으로 달려들며 그 불을 발로 밟아 껐어요.
곧이어 용이 사냥꾼에게 덤벼들었어요.
하지만 사냥꾼도지지 않고 바람을 가르며 검을 휘두른 결과, 용의 머리 세 개를 단칼에 벨 수 있었어요.
그러자 용이 길길이 화를 내며 들고 일어나 사냥꾼을 향해 화염(불꽃)들을 마구 내뿜었어요.
이러다간 금방이라도 그가 타 거꾸러질 거 같았어요.
하지만 이에 지지 않고 사냥꾼이 검을 내뻗자 또다시 용의 머리 세 개가 잘려나가고 말았지요.
괴물이 이젠 기진맥진 해 풀썩 주저앉았어요. 
그럼에도 불구하고 사냥꾼을 향해 돌진하는 건 멈추지 않았어요.
하지만 사냥꾼 최후의 일격이 용의 꼬리에 가해져 그 꼬리가 잘려나가자, 용도 더는 싸움을 지탱할 수 없었어요.
그때 사냥꾼의 동물친구들이 달려들어 용을 갈가리 찢어놓고 말았어요.
격렬한 싸움이 끝나자, 사냥꾼이 교회의 문을 열어보니, 공주님은 바닥에 쓰러져 계셨어요. 
싸움이 계속되는 동안 고통과 괴로움에 지쳐 정신을 잃으신 거죠.
그가 그녀를 밖으로 데리고 나왔어요.
그녀가 다시 정신을 차리고 눈을 떴을 때, 그가 그녀에게 산산이 조각난 용을 보여주며, 그녀가 살았다는 것을 말해주었어요.
그녀가 기뻐하며 말했어요.
“이제 당신은 제 남편이세요, 왜냐면 아빠가 용을 죽인 자에게 저를 주시겠다 약속하셨거든요.”
그런 까닭에 공주가 산호로 만든 자신의 목걸이를 벗어 보답차원에서 동물들에게 하나씩 나누어주었어요. 그리고 사자는 황금 ‘버클’(서로 맞대어 끼워 넣는 거. 목걸이의 버클?)을 받았어요.
하지만 공주는 자신의 이름이 새겨진 손수건을 사냥꾼에게 주었고, 사냥꾼은 가서 용의 일곱 머리에서 혀를 잘라내 그 손수건으로 감싼 다음 잘 보관했어요.
이 일을 마치자, 그는 불과 싸움에 너무도 지치고 기진맥진해진 나머지 처녀(공주)에게 말했어요.
“우리 여기서 잠시 자다가 갑시다, 제가 지금 너무 피곤해 움직이질 못하겠소.”
그래서 그녀도 말했어요.
“네~♥”
그들이 땅바닥 위에 누웠을 때 사냥꾼이 사자에게 말했어요.
“넌 망을 보고 있거라, 우리가 잘 때 아무도 얼씬 못하게 해.”
그럼 다음 둘은 잠이 들었어요.
그들 옆에서 망을 보던 사자도 전투과정에서 지치긴 마찬가지인지라 곧 자리에 누우며 곰에게 말했어요.
“아이고, 난 좀 자야겠다. 넌 망을 보고 있어, 누가 오면 냉큼 나를 깨우라고.”
곰도 또한 피곤했던지라 그 옆에 누우며 늑대를 불러 말했어요.
“난 좀 자야겠어. 넌 망을 보고 있어, 누가 오면 냉큼 나를 깨우고.”
그럼 다음 늑대고 마찬가지로 피곤했던지라 그 옆자리에 누우며 여우를 불러 말했어요.
“난 좀 자께. 넌 망을 봐, 누가 오면 나를 깨우고.”
그런 다음 여우도 피곤하긴 마찬가지인지라 그 옆자리에 누우며 산토끼를 불러 말했지요.
“나 좀 자께. 넌 망을 보거라, 누가 오면 나 깨우고.”
그래서 산토끼만 사냥꾼 옆에 망을 보며 앉아 있었는데, 하지만 불쌍한 산토끼도 피곤하긴 마찬가지였지만, 망을 보라며 임무를 넘길 친구가 하나도 없지 뭐예요, 그래서 산토끼는 그냥 푹 쓰러져 쿨쿨 자고 말았어요.
공주님, 사냥꾼, 사자, 곰, 늑대, 여우, 산토끼까지 모두 업어 가도 모를 정도로 깊은 잠을 자고 있었지요.
하지만 먼발치에서 망을 보고 있던 장군은, 용이 처녀(공주)를 데리고 날아가는 모습이 보이지 않고 또 언덕 위가 조용한 것이 이상해, 용기를 내 올라가 보았어요.  
용이 거기에 산산조각 난도질당해 땅바닥 위에 널부러저 있는데, 머지않은 곳에 공주님이 사냥꾼과 동물들과 함께 깊은 잠에 빠져 있는 거예요.
원체 사악하고 인정머리가 없던 장군인지라 자신의 검을 꺼내 사냥꾼의 머리를 자르곤 팔에 처녀(공주)를 움켜쥐곤 언덕 아래로 내려왔지요.
그때 공주가 깨어나더니 깜짝 놀라했어요.
하지만 장군은 말했지요.
“당신은 이제 내 손아귀에 있소. 용을 죽인 게 나라 얘기하시오.” 
“그럴 순 없어요.”라며 공주가 대답했어요. “그건 동물친구들과 사냥꾼님이 하신 일이잖아오.”
그러자 장군이 검을 뽑아들며 자기 말을 따르지 않음 당장에 죽여버리겠노라 위협했어요.
그런 강요에 못이겨 그녀가 약속하고 말았어요.
장군은 왕에게 공주를 데려갔어요.
어찌된 영문인지 모르는 왕은, 괴물에 의해 갈기갈기 찢겨 죽었으리라 믿었던, 사랑하는 딸을 산채로 다시 보게 되자 너무도 기뻤어요. 
장군이 왕에게 말했어요.
“제가 용을 죽이고 소녀(공주님)와 왕국을 구했습니다. 그러니 약속대로 그녀를 제 아내로 주십시오.”
왕이 처녀에게 말했어요.
“그의 말이 사실이냐?”
“아, 네.”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “사실일 거예요, 하지만 저는 1년하고도 1일이 지날 때까지 결혼식에 동의해드리지 않겠어요.”
왜냐하면 이 기간이면 사랑하는 사냥꾼님이 어찌되셨는지 소문을 들을 수 있을 거라 공주가 생각했기 때문이에요.
하지만 그 시각에도 동물친구들은 용 언덕 위에 죽은 주인 옆에서 계속 자고 있었지요.
그러다 큰 ‘호박벌’ 한 마리가 날아와 산토끼의 코를 콕 하고 쏘았어요.
하지만 산토끼를 앞발로 쓱쓱 문지르더니 계속 잤어요.
호박벌이 두 번째로 톡 쏘자 산토끼가 다시 팍팍 끓더니 또 잠을 잤어요.
이번에 호박벌이 세 번째로 쾅하고 쏘고 가자 깜짝 놀란 산토끼가 벌떡 깨어났어요.
잠에서 깨자마자 산토끼를 여우를 깨었고, 여우가 늑대를, 늑대가 곰을, 곰이 사자를 연거푸 깨었어요.
사자가 깨어나 보니 처녀(공주님)는 온데간데없고 자신의 주인은 죽어있었어요.
사자가 불같이 화를 내며 꾸짖었어요.
“너 뭐 한거야? 곰, 너 왜 나 안 깨웠어?”
곰이 늑대에게 물었어요.
“왜 나 안 깨웠어?”
늑대가 여우에게 물었어요.
“나 왜 안 깨운 건데?”
여우가 산토끼에게 물었어요.
“나 깨우라 했잖아?”
불쌍한 산토끼는 뭔 말을 어떻게 해야 할지 몰라, 모든 비난을 감내하고 있었죠.
그때 동물친구들이 산토끼에게 달려 들려하자, 산토끼가 싹싹 빌며 말했어요.
“나 죽이지 마, 대신 내가 우리 주인님을 다시 살릴게. 내가 약초가 자라는 산을 하나 아는데, 그 약초를 입에 넣으면 모든 질병과 상처를 아물게 할 수 있단다. 하지만 그 산은 여기서 200시간 떨어져 있어.”
사자가 말했어요.
“24시간 주께, 어서 그 약초를 캐와.”
그리하여 산토끼가 냉큼 달려가 가까스로 24시간 만에 약초를 물고 다시 돌아왔어요.
사자는 사냥꾼의 머리를 다시 몸에 붙였어요, 산토끼가 약초를 그의 입에 넣자 그 즉시 모든 게 다시 합쳐지며 그의 심장이 쿵쾅 뛰고 생명이 다시 돌아왔어요.
사냥꾼은 깨자마자 처녀(공주님)가 안 보여 놀라 생각했어요.
“내가 자는 사이에 달아나신 겐가, 나를 떨어뜨려 놓으려고.”
사자가 워낙 급하게 주인의 머리를 몸에 붙이다 잘못해 돌려서 붙였는데, 사냥꾼은 공주 생각에 상심이 너무도 커 그 사실을 인지하지 못했어요.
하지만 낮12시가 되어 그가 뭐 좀 먹으려고 할 때서야 그는 자신의 머리가 앞뒤로 바뀐 걸 보곤 이게 뭔 영문인지 몰라 동물친구들에게 자신이 자고 있는 사이에 무슨 일이 벌어진 건지 물었어요.
그러자 사자가 말했어요.
“저희들도 피곤해 골아떨어지는 바람에 몰라요, 다만 깨어나 보니 주인님 머리가 잘려져 있어서, 산토끼가 생명의 약초를 캐왔고, 제(사자)가 다급하게 머리를 붙이다 그만 반대방향으로 붙여서 주인님을 살려낸 거예요.”
그래서 사자가 다시 사냥꾼의 머리를 떼어내 앞뒤로 돌려 정상으로 맞춘 다음 산토끼가 캐온 약초로 되살려냈어요.
하지만 다시 살아나고서도 사냥꾼은 정말 상심이 이만저만 아니었어요.
그래서 세상을 이리저리 방랑했지요.
자신의 동물친구들보고 사람들 앞에서 춤을 추게 해 돈을 받았지요.
그렇게 소중한 1년이 다 가고, 그(사냥꾼)는 다시 자신이 용에게서 공주를 구한 그 마을에 들어서게 되었어요.
그런데 이번엔 온 마을에 붉은 천이 화려하게 매달려 있는 거예요.
사냥꾼이 여인숙 주인장에게 말했어요.
“뭔 일이죠? 작년엔 온 마을에 검은 띠가 걸려 있더니, 오늘은 또 붉은 천이 매달려 있다니?”
주인장이 대답했어요.
“작년엔 공주님이 용에게 받쳐지는 거라 검은 띠를 단 거였지. 하지만 장군님이 용과 싸워 무찔렀다네. 그래서 내일 장군님이 공주님과 결혼식을 올리거든. 그래서 온 마을에 축하의 의미로 붉은 천을 매단 걸세.”
결혼식이 열리기로 예정된 다음날이 되자, 사냥꾼이 낮12시쯤 돼서 여인숙 주인장에게 말했어요.
“이봐요 주인장, 내가 오늘 왕이 먹는 빵을 먹을 거라면 믿으시겠소?”
“에끼.”라며 주인장이 말했어요. “원 말 같지도 않은 소리를. 좋아, 내 금화 백 닢을 걸지.”
사냥꾼이 그 내기를 받아들이며 지갑에서 그와 똑같은 개수의 금화를 꺼냈어요.
그런 다음 그는 산토끼에게 말했어요.
“어이 달리기 친구, 네가 가서 왕이 드시는 빵을 좀 가져오려무나.”
작은 산토끼는 동물서열 중에서 가장 낮았던지라 이 말 같지도 않은 소리를 다른 친구에게 대신하게 시킬 수가 없어 자신이 직접 가야했어요.
“에구구!”라며 산토끼가 생각했어요. “몸이 작은 나 혼자 거리로 나가면 분명 정육점(고짓간) 앞에 있던 개들이 나를 뒤 쫓아올 텐데.”
참말로 그랬어요.
개들이 산토끼를 뒤 쫓아와 산토끼의 고운 피부를 한 입에 꿀꺽하겠다고 달려들었어요.
하지만 산토끼가 가까스로 ‘토껴’(달아나) 버렸어요.
그럼 산토끼가 어디로 사라진 걸까요?
네, 눈에 띄지 않게 보초병들의 초소(집)로 몸을 숨긴 거랍니다.
곧 개들이 낌새를 채고 보초병들의 초소로 달려들었지요. 하지만 개들과 장난칠 기분이 아니었던 보초병들이 총의 ‘개머리판’(끝부분. 총구 반대쪽 나무)으로 놈들을 갈겨버렸어요. 그러자 깨갱 그리며 개들이 달아나버렸어요.
그제야 한 숨 돌린 산토끼가 안전하게 길을 깡충깡충 뛰며 궁전으로 들어가 곧장 공주님에게로 향했다빈다.
공주님은 자신의 의자에 앉아 계시다, 누가 자신의 발을 할퀴는 것을 느끼곤 말했지요.
“저리 안 가니?”
네, 맞아요, 공주님은 자신이 키우는 강아지가 그러는 줄 아셨던 거예요.
산토끼가 두 번째로 공주님의 발을 할퀴자, 그녀가 다시 말했어요.
“저리 가렴?”
그게 자신의 강아지인 줄 아셨거든요.
하지만 산토끼가 포기하고 말 애는 아니잖아요, 그래서 세 번째로 그녀의 발을 콕 할퀴었답니다.
그러자 그녀가 아래를 흘끔 봤어요. 그녀는 산토끼가 한 목걸이를 보고 그 산토끼를 알아봤어요.
그녀가 산토끼를 무릎위에 올려 자기 침실로 데리고 갔어요.
그녀가 말했다빈다.
“귀여운 산토끼야, 뭘 원하니?”
산토끼(남자)가 대답했어요.
“용을 죽이신 제 주인님이 여기 오셨는데 왕이 드시는 빵 한 덩어리만 구해오라며 저를 보내셨어요.”
그런 다음 공주가 기뻐하며 빵 굽는 사람을 불러 왕이 드시는 것과 같은 걸로 빵 한 덩어리를 산토끼에게 주라 지시했어요.
귀여운 산토끼가 말했지요.
“다만 빵 구우시는 분이 직접 거기까지 빵을 들고 가게 해주세용, 개가 들고 갔다간 정육점 앞에 있는 개들에게 당하고 말 거거든요.”
빵 굽는 사람이 산토끼의 말대로 여인숙의 문까지 빵을 갔다주었지요, 그런 다음 산토끼가 자신의 뒷다리를 앞으로 빼고 쭈그리고 앉아 두 앞발로 그 빵 덩어리를 건네받은 다음 주인에게 전달해주었어요.
그러자 사냥꾼이 말했지요.
“보시오, 주인장 양반, 그럼 금화 백 닢은 제꺼구려.”
주인장이 놀라 어안이 벙벙해 있는데, 사냥꾼이 계속 말을 했어요.
“그래서 말이오, 주인장 양반, 빵도 받았겠다, 내가 이제 왕이 드시는 구운 고기를 좀 먹어볼까 하는데 말이오.”  
주인장이 말했어요.
“나 원 참 그런 말 같지도 않은,”
다만 주인장도 말은 그렇게 했지만 이미 본 게 있는지라 내기를 추가로 걸지는 않으려 했어요.
사냥꾼이 여우를 부르더니 말했어요.
“내 귀여운 여우야, 내가 가서 왕이 드시는 구운 고기를 좀 가져오거라.”
붉은 여우는 샛길을 산토끼보다 잘 알고 있던 지라 개들에게 시달리지 않고 구멍과 구석탱이들을 잘 활용해 궁전으로 들어가 공주님이 앉은 의자 밑에 앉았어요.
여우가 공주님의 발을 할퀴었어요.
그러자 공주가 아래를 내려다보았죠.
공주는 여우가 한 목걸이를 보곤 여우를 알아봤어요. 그래서 자신의 침실로 데려가 말했지요.
“귀여운 여우야, 뭘 원하니?”
여우가 대답했어요. 
“용을 무찌르신 제 주인님께서 여기 오셨는데 왕이 드시는 것과 똑같은 구운 고기를 좀 구해오라며 저를 보내셨어요.”
그러자 공주가 요리사를 부르더니 왕이 드시는 것과 똑같은 구운 고깃덩어리 하나를 준비하게 했어요.
요리사가 여우를 위해 여인숙 문까지 그 고깃덩어리를 들어다 주었어요.
그런 다음 여우기 자신의 꼬리로 고깃덩어리 위에 앉은 날파리들을 쫓아내고 접시를 건네받은 다음 자신의 주인에게 전달해드렸어요.
“보시구려, 주인장 양반,”라며 사냥꾼이 말했어요. “빵과 고기가 여기 있소. 자 내가 이번엔 이들과 같이 먹을 적절한 채소를 구해볼까 하는데 말이오, 물론 왕이 드시는 것과 똑같은 채소 말이오.”
그런 다음 그가 늑대를 부르더니 말했어요.
“친애하는 늑대야, 저쪽으로 가서 왕이 드시는 것과 같은 채소를 가져오려무나.”
늑대는 두려울 것이 하나도 없었기 때문에 궁전으로 곧장 가서 공주님의 침실로 들어가, 공주님의 드레스 뒷부분을 확 잡아당겼어요.
그 바람에 공주님이 뒤를 돌아보았죠.
늑대가 한 목걸이를 보고 공주님이 그 늑대를 알아봤어요.
늑대를 침실 안으로 데리고 온 그녀가 말했지요.
“친애하는 늑대야, 뭘 원하니?”
늑대가 대답했어요.
“용을 무찌르신 제 주인님께서 여기 와 계신데, 왕이 드시는 야채를 좀 구해오라 제게 시키셨어요.”
그런 다음 공주는 요리사를 오게 해 왕이 드시는 것과 똑같은 야채 한 접시를 준비하게 했어요.
요리사가 늑대를 위해 그 야채 접시를 여인숙 문까지 들어다 주었어요.
그런 다음 늑대가 요리사에게서 그 야채 접시를 건네 받은 다음 자신의 주인에게 전달해주었답니다.
“보시구려, 주인장 양반,”라며 사냥꾼이 말했어요. “이제 빵에다 고기에다 야채까지 얻었구려, 그렇담 왕이 드시는 과자가 없어서야 써나.”
그가 곰을 불러 말했어요.
“사랑하는 곰아, 네가 달콤한 걸 핥길 좋아하니, 이번엔 네가 가서 왕이 드시는 과자를 좀 구해오거라.”
곰이 뛰어 달려 궁전으로 갔어요. 모든 사람들이 곰에게 길을 비껴주었답니다.
하지만 곰은 자신의 임무를 충실히 수행 중이던 보초병들과 마주쳐야했답니다.
보초병들은 자신들의 구식 소총(머스킷 총)을 겨누며 좀처럼 왕이 계신 궁전을 비켜주려하지 않았죠.
하지만 곰이 뒷발로 일어나, 두 앞발로 보초병들의 귓방망이(귀 부분)를 왼쪽 오른쪽으로 몇 번 갈겨버리자(때려버리자) 모든 보초병들이 뿔뿔이 흩어지며 달아나는 바람에, 곰은 곧장 공주님께 갈 수 있었어요.
곰이 그녀 뒤에 자리를 잡고 않아 잠시 으르렁거리자, 그녀가 뒤를 돌아보고 그 곰을 알아봤어요.
그래서 공주가 곰을 자기 방으로 들이곤 말했지요.
“사랑하는 곰아, 무얼 원하니?”
곰이 대답했어요. 
“용을 무찌르신 제 주인님께서 여기 와 계신데, 왕이 드시는 것과 같은 과자를 좀 구해오라며 저를 보내셨답니다.”
그러자 공주가 자신의 ‘과자 제조인’을 부르더니 왕이 드시는 걸로 과자를 굽게 했어요.
‘과자 제조인’이 곰을 위해 과자를 여인숙 문까지 들어다주었지요.
그런 다음 곰이 굴러 떨어진 과자 부스러기들을 땅바닥 위에서 핥아먹은 다음 몸을 세우고 서서 그 접시를 건네받은 다음 자신의 주인에게 전달해주었어요.
“보시구려, 주인장 양반,”라며 사냥꾼이 말했어요. “이제 빵에다 고기에다 채소에다 과자까지 얻었구려. 하지만 이것들과 같이 먹을 술이 없어서야 써나, 왕이 마시는 것과 똑같은 술 말이오.”
그가 사자를 부르더니 말했어요.
“사랑하는 사자야, 네가 취할 때까지 마시는 술을 좋아하지 않니, 그러니 이번엔 네가 가서 왕이 마시는 것과 똑같은 포도주를 좀 가져오거라.”
그럼 다음 사자가 거리를 성큼성큼 걸어갔지요. 
사람들은 달아나기 바빴답니다.
사자와 마주친 보초병들이 문을 막고 서서 사자가 들어오지 못하게 하려고 기를 써다, 그만 사자가 한 번 “어흥!”하고 포효하자 걸음아 나 살려라 하며 모두들 도망치고 말았답니다. 
그런 다음 사자는 궁전의 침실로 향했죠.
그러곤 자신의 꼬리로 똑똑 문을 노크했답니다.
공주님이 문을 열어주셨지요, 그런데 웬 사자가 앉아 있어 깜짝 놀라 뻔했어요. 하지만 자신의 목걸이 중에서도 황금 ‘버클’(목걸이를 풀고 다시 끼워 닫는 거?)을 사자가 하고 있는 것을 보고서 그를 알아봤죠. 
공주님이 사자를 침실로 들어오게 하곤 물었어요.
“사랑하는 사자야, 뭘 원하니?”
사자가 대답했어요.
“용을 무찌르신 제 주인님께서 지금 여기 와 계신데, 왕이 마시는 것과 같은 포도주를 좀 구해오라 하셔서 제가 왔습니다.”
공주님이 ‘술잔을 따라 올리는 사람’을 불러 “이 사자에게 왕이 드시는 것과 같은 포도주를 좀 드리세요.”라고 말했어요.
사자가 말했지요.
 “제가 그와 함께 가서 올바른 포도주를 주는지 확인하겠습니다.”
사자가 ‘술잔을 따라 올리는 사람’과 함께 지하로 내려갔을 때, ‘술잔을 따라 올리는 사람’이 왕의 시종(하인)들이나 마시는 흔해빠진 포도주를 좀 따라 사자에게 주려 했어요.
그러자 사자가 말했어요.
“멈춰, 내가 먼저 맛을 봐야 하겠어.”
그래서 사자가 반쯤 따른 그 잔을 받아 쭉 들이키더니, “뭐야 이거,”라며 말했어요. “이건 아니잖아.”
‘술잔을 따라 올리는 사람’이 사자를 한번 흘겨보더니 가서 이번엔 왕의 ‘장군’(원문→육군 원수)이 마시는 통에서 좀 따라 사자에게 건네려했어요.
사자가 말했어요.
“멈춰, 내가 먼저 그 포도주를 맛보고 나서 결정하자.”
반쯤 따른 그 잔을 사자가 들이켰어요.
“아까보단 좀 낫네, 하지만 여전히 이건 아냐.”라며 사자가 말했어요.
그러자 ‘술잔을 따라 올리는 사람’이 짜증이 나 말했어요.
“무식한 짐승이 어찌 포도주의 참맛을 안다고 그래?”
그러자 사자가 그의 귀방망이(귀부분) 뒷부분을 사정없이 한 대 갈겼더니, 그가 무기력하게 나자빠졌다 가까스로 다시 일어나더니, 사자를 데리고 좀 떨어진 다른 지하실 방으로 들어가 이번엔 정말 왕이 마시는 포도주를 좀 따라주었어요. 그건 아무나 마시는 게 아니었거든요. 
사자가 먼저 반쯤 따른 그 포도주를 시음(맛봄)해보더니 말했어요.
“기막히군. 바로 이거야.”
사자가 ‘술잔을 따라 올리는 사람’에게 이걸로 여섯 병 가득 채우라고 지시했어요.
이리하여 그들이 다시 위층으로 올라왔지요.
하지만 지하실에서 탁 트인 바깥으로 나온 사자는 이리저리 휘청거리기에 바빴지 뭐예요. 사실 좀 취했거든요.
그래서 자의 반 타의 반 ‘술잔을 따라 올리는 사람’이 그 포도주 병들이 든 바구니를 사자 대신 여인숙 문까지 대신 들어줘야 했답니다. 
그런 다음 사자가 입으로 그 바구니를 건네받아 자신의 주인에게 전달해주었어요.
사냥꾼이 말했지요.
“보시구려, 주인장 양반, 여기 빵에다가, 고깃덩어리에다가, 채소에다가, 과자와 포도주까지 죄다 왕이 드시는 바로 그것이지 않소. 그럼 이제 내 동물친구들과 식사를 맛나게 해야겠군.”
그는 앉아 먹고 마셨어요. 그리고 산토끼와 여우와 늑대 그리고 곰과 사자에게도 그 음식들을 먹고 마시게 해주었어요.
그들은 아주 기뻤답니다. 이번 일을 통해 공주님께서는 여전히 사냥꾼을 사랑하고 계시다는 게 확인이 되었으니까요.
식사를 다 마치자 그가 말했어요.
“주인장 양반, 내가 왕께서 먹고 마시는 걸로 배도 채웠겠다, 이제부턴 왕의 궁전으로 가 공주님과 결혼을 해볼까 하네만.”
여인숙 주인이 말했어요.
“허허참 말 같지도 않은 소리를, 그게 어디 가당키나 하오. 공주님은 이제 조금만 있음 사랑하는 지아비가 생기는데, 결혼식이 바로 오늘이란 말이오. 알긴 아오?”
그러자 사냥꾼이 용 언덕에서 공주를 구했을 때 공주가 준 손수건을 꺼내 펼쳐 괴물의 일곱 개 혀들을 보여주며 말했지요.
“이게 나를 그리되게 해줄 겝니다.”
여인숙 주인이 그 손수건을 찬찬히 들여다보더니 말했어요.
“원 참 아닌 거 같은데, 좋소 내 이번엔 내 집 전체와 안마당에 있는 걸 죄다 걸겠소.”
하지만 사냥꾼은 가방에서 금화 천 개를 꺼내 삭탁 위에 펼쳐보이며 말했어요.
“그럼 난 이걸 걸겠소이다.”
그때 왕은 ‘성대한’(푸짐한) 식사가 차려진 식탁에서 자기 딸에게 말했어요.
“너를 찾아온 야생 동물들이 내 방을 들락거렸다는 말이 무슨 말이냐?”
그녀가 대답했어요.
“지금은 말씀드릴 수 없지만, 그 동물들을 보낸 주인이 있을 거니, 사람을 보내 불러보시는 게 아빠에게도 좋을 거예요.”
왕이 시종을 그 여인숙으로 보내 그 손님을 초대했어요.
때마침 시종이 도착했을 때가, 사냥꾼이 여인숙주인과 한참 내기를 걸고 있을 때였지요.
그때 사냥꾼이 말했어요.
“보시구려, 주인장 양반, 왕께서 자기 시종을 보내 나를 부르시지 않소, 하지만 난 이대로는 가지 않을 거요.”
사냥꾼이 그 시종(하인)에게 말했어요.
“가서 국왕께 전하거라, 내가 요구하더라고 말이다. 왕족의 옷과 여섯 필의 말이 끄는 마차(왕의 마차)와 나를 수행할 시중들을 말이다.”
왕이 이 말을 전해 듣곤 딸에게 말했지요. 
“이게 무슨 뚱딴지같은 소리냐? 내가 어떻게 하면 되겠니?”
공주가 말했어요.
“그분이 바라는 걸 내려주는 게 아빠에게도 좋은 거예요.”
그래서 왕이 왕족의 옷과 여섯 필의 말이 끄는 마차 한 대와 그를 수행할 시중들을 보냈답니다.
그들이 오는 것을 본 사냥꾼이 말했지요.
“보시구려, 주인장 양반, 내가 요구한 게 저기 다 오고 있지 않소.”
사냥꾼은 왕족의 옷을 입은 다음, 용의 혀들을 감싼 그 손수건을 잘 챙겨 마차에 올라 왕에게로 향했어요.
그가 오는 것을 본 왕이 딸에게 말했어요.
“내가 그를 어떻게 맞이하면 좋겠느냐?”
공주가 대답했어요.
“마중 나가셔서 맞이하는 게 아빠에게도 좋은 거예요.”
그러자 왕이 사냥꾼을 마중 나가 안으로 데려왔어요. 물론 그의 동물친구들도 뒤따라왔지요.
왕이 자기 옆자리를 사냥꾼에게 주었어요. 왕과 사냥꾼 옆엔, 공주님이 곧 신랑이 될 ‘장군’(원문→육군 원수)과 마주보며 앉았어요. 장군은 그 사냥꾼이 누군지 전혀 기억 못했지요.
바로 이때 일곱 개의 용머리가 구경거리의 일환으로 앞에 진열되자, 왕이 말했어요.
“장군이 자른 일곱 개의 용머리요, 오늘 내 그에게 내 딸을 아내로 주려고 하오.”
그때 사냥꾼이 벌떡 일어나더니 일곱 개 용의 입들을 벌리며 말했어요.
“용의 일곱 혀는 다 어디로 갔죠?”
그러자 장군이 화들짝 놀라하며 얼굴이 창백해져 어찌 답해야 될지 몰라 하고 있었지요.
결국 장군이 몹시 괴로워하며 말했어요.
“용들은 원래 혀가 없소.”
사냥꾼이 말했지요.
“응당 이 세상에서 거짓말쟁이가 가질 건 하나도 없소이다. 그러니 용의 혀들이 승리자의 정표(상징)임이 분명하오.”
그러더니 사냥꾼이 용들의 일곱 혀가 들어 있던 손수건을 펼쳐보였어요.
사냥꾼이 그 혀 각각을 원래 자리인 용의 일곱 입에 넣었더니 정확하게 딱 맞았어요.
그런 다음 사냥꾼은 공주의 이름이 수놓아져 있는 그 손수건을 처녀(공주님)에게 내밀며, “이 손수건을 누구에게 주었지요?”라고 물었어요.
공주가 대답했어요.
“용을 무찌르신 자에게요.”
그때 사냥꾼이 동물친구들을 불러 목걸이를 벗겨내고, 사자에게서는 황금 ‘버클’(목걸이를 닫고 끼우고 하는 거?)을 벗겨낸 다음, 목걸이와 황금 버클을 처녀(공주님)에게 보여주며, “이것들의 주인이 누구요?”라고 물었지요.
공주님이 답했어요.
“이 목걸이와 황금 버클은 원래 제 것이었지만, 용을 무찌르는데 도움을 준 동물친구들에게 제가 하나씩 나눠준 것이랍니다.”
그런 다음 사냥꾼이 말을 꺼냈어요.
“싸움 후 나는 완전히 지쳐 휴식을 취하며 자고 있었소. 바로 그때 저 장군이 와 내 목을 자르고, 공주를 데리고 가 자신이 용을 죽였다 주장했소. 하지만 여기 이 혀들과, 손수건, 그리고 이 목걸이들로 인해 장군의 거짓말이 들통 났소이다.”
그런 다음 사냥꾼은 죽은 자신이 자신의 동물친구들이 구해온 신기한 약초 덕분에 살아난 일이며, 자신이 1년 가량을 정처 없이 방랑한 일이며, 그러다 결국 이 곳에 다시 도착했을 때 여인숙 주인이 하는 얘기를 들으며 장군의 배신을 꺠닫게 된 얘기까지 다 해주었어요. 
그러자 왕이 딸에게 물었어요.
“용을 죽인 자가 이 분이 맞느냐?”
공주가 대답했어요.
“네, 모두 다 사실이세요. 저는 이제 장군의 위협을 무릅쓰고서라도 그 사악한 행위를 낱낱이 말씀드릴 수 있어요. 이제 진실의 빛을 밝힐 때가 되었으니까요. 장군은 그동안 제게 침묵을 강요했어요. 그 때문에 저는 제 결혼을 1년 1일 후에 하겠다며 시간을 번 거예요.”
그때 왕이 12명의 ‘재판관’(원문→의원)들을 소집해 이 일을 판결(재판)하라 지시를 내렸어요.
그 12명의 재판관들이 장군에게 네 마리의 황소들에 의해 몸이 찢겨지는 형벌을 내렸어요.
장군은 그렇게 처형되었습니다.
하지만 왕은 사냥꾼에겐 자신의 딸을 주고, 온 왕국을 왕 대신 다르시는 총독으로 임명했지요.
결혼식은 큰 기쁨과 함께 성대하게 거행되었어요.
젊은 왕(사냥꾼)은 사람을 보내 자신의 친아버지와 길러준 양아버지를 모두 오게 해 보물을 한가득 실어다 드렸지요.
그는 여인숙 주인도 잊지 않았어요. 그는 사람을 보내 여인숙 주인에게 말했어요.
“보시구려, 주인장 양반, 내가 공주와 결혼할 거다 그러지 않았소, 자 당신의 집과 안마당은 여전히 자네의 것이오.”
여인숙 주인이 말했어요.
“정의에 따라 응당 그러셔야죠.”
하지만 젊은 왕(사냥꾼)은 말했어요.
“이건 자비의 이름으로 한 것이라네.”
그런 다음 젊은 왕은 자기가 내기에서 이겼지만, 여인숙 주인의 집과 안마당을 보전해준 것뿐만 아니라, 자신의 내기 자금이었던 금화 천 개도 그 여인숙 주인에게 주었답니다.
이제 젊은 왕과 왕비는 진짜 행복하게 그리고 서로에게 만족해하며 잘 살았답니다.
다만 그는 즐거움을 위해 자신의 충실한 동물친구들을 데리고 사냥을 종종 나가곤 했지요. 
하지만 그 숲 인근(근처)에는 유령이 출몰한다는 소문이 붙은 숲이 하나 있었는데, 그 숲에 들어간 사람은 어지간해서는 그냥 빠져나오지 못한다는 것이었어요.
그렇지만 젊은 왕(사냥꾼)은 그 숲에 들어가서 한 번 크게 사냥을 해보고 싶었어요.
그래서 나이 드신 왕이 허락해줄 때까지 달달 볶았죠.
그리하여 그가 많은 무리를 이끌고 거기로 사냥을 나갔어요.
그 숲에 막 들어섰을 때, 그의 눈에 새하얀 수사슴 한 마리가 보였고, 그래서 그가 자신의 부하들에게 말했어요.
“내가 돌아올 때까지 너희들은 여기서 기다려라, 내 저 아름다운 놈을 뒤쫓고 싶구나.”
그가 말을 타고서 자신의 동물친구들만 데리고서 그 숲으로 들어갔답니다. 
수행원들은 멈춰 서서 밤까지 기다려보았지만 그가 돌아오지 않자 궁전으로 돌아가 젊은 왕비에게, 젊은 왕이 흰 수사슴을 쫓아 유령이 출몰하는 숲에 들어갔는데 돌아오지 않습니다, 라고 보고했어요.
이 때문에 왕비는 그가 여간 걱정이 되는 게 아니었어요.
하지만 그는 여전히 말을 타고서 그 아름다운 야생 동물을 뒤쫓고 있었어요.
하지만 절대 따라잡지는 못했지요.
수사슴을 다 따라잡았다고 생각하면 금세 사정권에서 벗어나 있고 하다 보니, 결국엔 사냥도 수포로 돌아가고 말았죠.
그제야 그는 자신이 숲에 너무 깊숙이 들어온 걸 깨달았어요.
그래서 뿔피리를 힘껏 불어보았지만 대답들이 없었어요. 수행원들이 너무 멀리 떨어져 있어 그 뿔피리 소리를 듣지 못한 거지요.
숲이라고 밤이 안 찾아오는 건 아니었기에, 그는 그날 밤은 여기서 보내기로 하고 말에서 내려 어느 나무 근처에서 모닥불을 피우고 몸을 녹이며 그날 밤을 보낼 작정이었지요.
그와 그의 동물친구들이 나란히 불가 옆에 드러누워 있는데, 어디선가 인간의 목소리가 들린 거 같았어요.
그가 주변을 둘러보니 역시나 아무도 없었어요.
이내 곧 마치 바로 위에서 나는 마냥 신음소리 같은 게 다시 들렸어요.
그러자 올려다 본 그의 눈에 노파 한 명이 나위에 걸터앉아 있는 게 보였어요. 그녀는 부단히도 소리 내며 울고 있었어요.
“오, 오, 오, 이럴 어쩐다!”
그가 말했어요.
“내려오시면 되잖아요, 추워서 그러시는 거면 내려와 불을 쬐세요.”
하지만 그녀는 말했어요.
“아니, 내려갔다가 당신 동물들에게 물릴까봐 그러지.”
그가 대답했어요.
“얘들은 당신을 해치지 않습니다. 할멈, 어서 내려오세요.”
하지만 그녀는 마녀였어요. 
마녀가 말했어요.
“그럼 내가 이 지팡이를 아래로 던져줄 테니, 그걸로 당신 동물들의 등을 두드리시게, 그럼 그들이 나를 물지 못할 테니.”
그런 다음 마녀가 작은 막대기 하나를 그에게 던졌어요.
그걸로 그가 동물들을 두드렸어요. 그 즉시 동물들이 조용히 누운 돌로 변해버렸어요.
동물들에게서 안전을 확인하자 마녀가 기어내려 오더니 막대기를 가지고 마찬가지로 그를 툭 두드렸어요. 그러자 그가 돌로 변해버렸어요.
그 즉시 마녀가 깔깔 웃으며 그와 동물들을 어느 지하 묘지로 질질 끌고 갔어요. 
그 지하 묘지는 이미 그런 돌들이 수없이 쌓여 있었어요.
그렇게 젊은 왕(사냥꾼)이 전혀 돌아올 기미를 보이지 않자, 왕비의 괴로움이 점점 더 커져갔어요.
그러다 우연히도, 서로 헤어질 때 동쪽으로 갔었던 다른 형제(젊은 왕의 친형)가 그 왕국에 들어오게 되었어요.
그는 일자리를 찾아보았지만 찾지 못하고, 여기저기를 방랑하며 사람들 앞에서 동물들에게 춤을 추게 하는 걸로 생을 이어가고 있었지요.
그러자 동생과 헤어질 때 나무줄기에 꽂아놓았던 칼로 가서 동생이 잘 지내는지 알아보고 싶어졌어요.
그런데 동생의 생을 상징하는 칼날 한 쪽의 반이 녹슬었는데 나머지 반은 멀쩡하지 뭐에요.
그(젊은 왕의 친형)가 깜짝 놀라 생각했어요.
“큰 불행이 내 동생을 덮쳤구나, 하지만 아직 내가 그를 구할 수 있음이 분명해, 칼날 한쪽면의 반이 아직 광채 나는 걸로 봐서는.”
그와 그의 동물친구들이 더 서쪽으로 여행을 했어요.
그리하여 그들이 마을 문에 들어섰을 때, 그와 마주친 보초병이, “도착하셨다는 사실을 아내이신 젊은 왕비님께 알릴까요? 안 계신 동안 왕비님의 상심이 이만저만이 아니었거든요. 유령이 출몰하는 그 숲에서 혹 죽은 건 아닌가 하고요.”라고 말하는 거예요. 
그 보초병들은 참말로 그가 젊은 왕이라 여긴 거지요.
왜냐면 그는 쌍둥이 형이었으니까요. 또한 야생 동물들이 그를 뒤따르고 있는 모습도 같았고 말이죠.
아무래도 자신의 쌍둥이 동생을 말하는 거 같다는 생각을 한 형이 생각했어요.
“나를 그로 착각하는 게 내가 그를 좀 더 쉽게 구출할 수 있는 길일지 몰라.”
그래서 그는 보초병들이 자신을 호위하며 성으로 들어가는 걸 허락했어요.
물론 그는 큰 환호성을 받으며 안내되었답니다.
젊은 왕비는 그가 정말 자기 남편이라 여기곤 “왜 이렇게 오래 계셨어요?”라고 물었지요.
그가 대답했어요. 
“숲에서 길을 잃었소. 어지간해서는 빠져나올 수가 없지 뭐요.”
그날 밤 그가 궁전의 침실로 안내되었어요.
하지만 그는 자신과 젊은 왕비 사이에 ‘양날 검’(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/5YnQQp )을 놓고 그 선을 넘지 않았어요.
그가 무슨 뜻으로 그러는지 그녀로선 알 길이 없었지만, 감히 여쭈어보지는 못했어요.
그는 궁전에서 2~3일을 보냈어요.
그 사이 그는 유령이 출물 한다는 그 숲의 정보를 샅샅이 모았어요. 
마침내 그가 말했지요.
“한 번 더 거기로 사냥을 나가봐야겠다.”
나이 드신 왕과 젊은 왕비가 그를 만류하려고 해보았지만, 그가 한사코 우기는 바람에 이번에 더 큰 무리를 이끌고 나게 나둘 수 밖에 없었지요.
그가 숲에 막 들어섰을 때, 동생에게 나타났던 바로 그 새하얀 수사슴이 또 보였어요.
그가 자신의 수행원들에게 말했어요.
“내가 돌아올 때까지 너희들은 여기서 머물거라, 나는 저 사랑스런 야생 동물을 추격해보고 싶구나.”
그런 다음 그가 말을 타고서 자신의 동물친구들과 함께 수사슴을 뒤쫓아 들어갔어요.
하지만 그는 그 수사슴을 따라잡을 수가 없었어요.
따라잡기는커녕 숲에 너무 깊이 들어오는 바람에 아무래도 그날 밤은 거기서 보내야했지요.
그가 모닥불을 피웠을 때, 누군가가 머리 위에서 우는 소리가 들렸어요.
“오, 오, 오, 이럴 어쩐담!”
그가 위를 올려다보니, 영락없이 마녀처럼 생긴 노파가 나무 위에 앉아 있는 게 아니겠어요.
그가 말했지요.
“추운 거면 내려오쇼, 할멈, 와서 몸을 녹이시구려.”
그녀가 대답했어요.
“아니, 당신 동물들이 나를 물까봐 그러지.”
하지만 그가 말했어요.
“얘네 들은 당신을 다치게 하지 않소.”
그때 그녀가 소리쳤어요.
“그럼 내가 막대기 하나를 당신에게 던져줄 테니, 그들이 나를 해치지 못하게 그걸로 그 애들 등을 두들기시게.”
그 이상한 소리를 들은 사냥꾼(형)은 노파의 정체가 의심스러워졌어요. 
그래서 그가 말했어요.
“나는 내 동물친구들을 때리지 않을 거요. 당신이 내려오시오, 안 그럼, 내가 올라가 당신을 끌고 내려오겠소.”
그러자 그녀가 소리쳤어요.
“뭐가 어째? 감히 내 몸에 손을 대겠다고.”
그러자 그가 대꾸했어요.
“그 말 한 번 거칠게 하시네, 당신이 영 내려오지 않겠다면 나도 방법이 있지. 총을 쏘는 수밖에.”
그녀가 말했어요.  
“어디 한 번 쏴봐라, 네 총알이 나를 스치기라도 할 거 같아.”
그가 조준해 “빵!”하고 총을 쏘았어요.
하지만 마녀는 납으로 된 총알들을 맞고도 끄떡도 없었어요.
과잖다는 듯 웃으며 큰 소리로 외쳐댔죠.
“그 꼴로 나를 맞추겠다고.”
그제야 상황파악이 된 사냥꾼(젊은 왕의 쌍둥이 형)이 자신의 외투에 있던 은단추 세 개를 뜯어내 총에 장전(총알을 넣음)했어요. 그녀의 술책을 무용지물로 만들기 위해서였죠.
그가 총을 “빵!”하고 쏘자, 그녀가 “꽥!” 비명을 지르며 떨어졌어요.
그가 발로 그녀를 누르며 말했어요.
“이 늙은 마녀야, 내 동생이 어디 있는지 말하지 않음, 내 두 손으로 당장 너를 저 불 속에다 집어던져버리겠다.”
마녀가 매우 놀라 자비를 베풀어 달라면서 말했어요.
“그와 그의 동물들은 지금 돌로 변해 지하 묘지에 있어요.”
그리하여 마녀에게 강요해 그 지하 묘지까지 온 그가 마녀를 위협하며 말했어요.
“이 추악한 물개야, 내 동생과 여기 있는 모든 사람들을 다시 살려내지 않음 정말로 너를 불속에 던져버리겠다!”
그녀가 막대기를 하나 집더니 돌들을 톡톡 두드렸어요.
그러자 동생과 동생의 동물친구들이 다시 살아났어요. 
그리고 다른 많은 사람들, 상인들, 장인들(기술자들), 양치는 사람들이 “다시 되살려줘 고맙다”고 말을 하며 일어나 각자 자신들의 고향으로 향했어요.
쌍둥이 형제는 서로를 다시 만나자 기뻐서 서로 키스를 하며 진심으로 반가워했지요.
그런 다음 그들이 마녀를 붙잡아 꽁꽁 묶은 다음 불에 올려 태워버리니, 그제야 숲이 저절로 탁 트이며 빛이 들고 공기가 맑아졌어요. 그래서 저 멀리 3시간 걸음 거리에 있는 궁전도 볼 수 있었답니다.
그 후 즉시 두 형제가 집으로 향해 출발했어요.
가는 도중 두 형제는 서로 어떻게 지냈는지를 얘기했어요.
동생(이 동화의 80% 주인공)은 자신이 어떻게 하여 왕을 대신해 온 나라의 통치자가 되었는지를 말해주었어요. 
그래서 형도 발언을 했는데요.
“말할 걸로 따지면 나도 만만치 않게 많지. 이 마을에 도착해보니 모두들 나를 너로 알아보고 왕 대하듯 하더구나. 게다가 젊은 왕비 또한 나를 자기 남편으로 착각했지. 그 바람에 나는 그녀 옆에서 먹고 네 침대에서 잤단다.”
그러자 동생이 그 말을 듣고 질투심과 분노에 휩쓸린 나머지 검을 뽑아 형의 머리를 “댕강” 쳐 버렸어요.  
하지만 형이 죽은 채 드러누워 붉은 피가 철철 흐르는 모습을 보니 후회가 물밀 듯 밀려왔어요.
“형은 나를 살렸는데,”라며 그(=동생=‘젊은 왕’=사냥꾼)그 소리쳤어요. “나는 그를 죽이고 말았구나.”
그가 목 놓아 통곡하고 말았어요.
그때 그(동생)의 산토끼가 깡충깡충 달려 나오더니 가서 생명의 약초를 가져오겠다고 자청하더니 실제로 가져왔어요.
산토끼가 죽어라 뛰어가 시간에 맞춰 약초를 가져왔기에, 죽은 형은 다시 되살아날 수 있었답니다. 물론 자신이 죽었다는 사실을 전혀 모른 채 말이죠.
이후 그들이 여행을 계속했어요.
동생이 말했어요.
“형은 나랑 똑같이 생겼으니, 나와 같은 왕족의 옷을 입고 동물친구들을 데리고서 나와 반대쪽 성문을 통해 입장해봐, 우리가 동시에 두 곳에서 나이 드신 국왕 앞에 나타나보자고.”
그리하여 그들이 헤어져, 동시에 두 성문에 있는 보초병들에게 갔어요.
그와 동시에 두 곳의 성문에서 젊은 왕과 그의 동물친구들이 도착했다는 소식이 전해졌죠. 
나이 드신 왕이 말했어요.
“이건 불가능한데, 성문이 서로 1킬로미터나 떨어져 있지 않은가.”
하지만 그러는 사이 두 형제가 궁전 안마당으로 서로 반대 방향에서 입장하더니 둘 다 계단을 밟고 올라오지 뭐예요.
그러자 왕이 딸(=공주=‘젊은 왕비’)에게 말했어요.
“어느 쪽이 네 남편인지 알아보겠느냐. 둘이 똑같이 생겨서 나는 몰라보겠구나.”
그녀도 처음엔 엄청 난처해하며 그 둘을 구별하지 못했지요.
하지만 마침내 동물친구들에게 자신이 나누어준 목걸이를 기억해내곤 다시 쳐다보니, 사자의 목에서 그녀(젊은 왕비)가 준 황금 ‘버클’(서로 맞대어 끼워 넣는 거. 목걸이의 버클?)을 발견하곤 기쁨에 차 외쳤어요.
“이 사자가 뒤따라온 분이 제 진짜 남편이십니다.”
그러자 젊은 왕(동생)이 “푸하하” 웃으며 말했지요.
“맞소, 내가 바로 당신 남편이오.”
그들이 함께 식탁에 앉아 먹고 마셨어요. 명랑하고 유쾌한 시간이었어요.
밤이 되어 젊은 왕이 침대로 가니, 자신의 아내(젊은 왕비)가 말했어요.
“그동안 왜 우리 침대에 양날 검을 항상 놓아 두신건가요? 저는 혹 저를 죽이시려는 줄 알고 얼마나 조마조마했는지 몰라요.”
그제야 그(젊은 왕)는 자신의 형이 얼마나 ‘진실 된’(올바른) 사람인지를 잘 알게 되었답니다.


(동화 끝)

동화 「두 형제」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「두 형제」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter60.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



61. 농사꾼 나부랭이 (작은 농부)(농투성이)(그림형제 동화)

농사꾼 나부랭이 (원문→작은 농부)
(‘농사꾼 나부랭이’, ‘농투성이’ : 농부를 얕잡아 부르는 말임)




옛날에 어떤 마을에요 가진 게 정말 하나도 없어서 농부를 얕잡아 부르는 말인, ‘농사꾼 나부랭이’(영어로는 ‘작은 농부’)라 불리는 사람이 한 명 살고 있었어요.
그럼 문제가 뭐냐? 그 마을엔 그 농사꾼 나부랭이 딱 한 명만 빼곤 싹 다 정말 부자 농부들이라는 거였죠.
농사꾼 나부랭이(작은 농부)는 암소 한 마리가 없었거니와 땡전 한 품 없었지요.
그럼에도 불구하고 그와 아내는 소가 한 마리 있었음 했어요.
어느 날 그가 아내에게 말했어요.
“여보 내 말 좀 들어봐, 좋은 생각이 있는데 말이야, 우리 친구인 목수한테 말해서, 나무로 된 송아지 한 마리만 만들어 달라 하자, 갈색으로 페인트칠을 하면 영락없는 송아지새끼로 보일 거야, 그럼 때가 되면 엄연한 큰 엄마소로 클 거 아냐.”
아내도 그 아이디어가 마음에 들었어요. 그래서 그들의 친구인 목수에게 말해 송아지를 조각해 그럴싸하게 페인트를 칠했어요.
그리하여 마치 풀을 뜯어먹고 있는 듯 고개를 아래로 내려뜨린 송아지가 한 마리 완성되었어요.
다음 날 소몰이꾼이 소를 몰고 가고 있을 때, 농사꾼 나부랭이(작은 농부)가 그를 부르더니 말했어요.
“봐, 송아지새끼 한 마리를 얻었는데, 너무 작아 들어다주어야 해.”
소몰이꾼이 말했어요.
“그쯤이야 뭐, 제가 품에 안아 목장까지 옮겨다 풀밭에 잘 세워둘게요.”
그 송아지가 항상 풀을 먹고 있는 듯이 서 있기에, 소몰이꾼은 말했어요.
“벌써 혼자서도 잘 먹는 걸 보니, 곧 뛰겠는 걸!”
밤이 되어 소 떼를 집으로 다시 데려 가려고, 그가 송아지에게 말했어요.
“거기 서서 그렇게 배부르게 먹을 정도면 이제 너도 네 발로 걸을 수가 있겠네, 그럼 돌아갈 땐 팔에 안고 안 갈 테니 그리 알아둬.”
하지만 농사꾼 나부랭이가 문에 서서 오매불망 자신의 송아지 새끼가 돌아오길 기다리고 있는데, 소몰이꾼이 소 떼들을 이끌고 마을에 들어서는데도, 자신의 송아지는 보이질 않는 거예요, 그래서 냉큼 달려가 그에게 “애는 어디 갔는데?”라고 물었지요.
소몰이꾼이 대답했어요.
“거기 남아 계속 먹으며 서 있는 통에, 저희랑 오지 못한 거 같네요.”
농사꾼 나부랭이가 발끈해하며 말했어요.
“오, 내 새낄 어째.” 
그리하여 그들이 함께 풀밭으로 가보니, 그새 누군가가 훔쳐갔는지 송아지의 모습은 온데간데 없었어요.
소몰이꾼이 말했어요.
“달아났나 봐요.”
하지만 농부는 말했어요.
“그딴 소리 하지마.”
그러면서 그는 소몰이꾼을 ‘마을이장’(원문→시장)님 앞으로 데리고 갔어요.
마을이장님은 소몰이꾼의 부주의함을 매섭게 질책하시고는, 달아난 그 송아지에 상응하는 암소 한 마리를 농부에게 주라 판결하셨어요.
이리하여 농사꾼 나부랭이와 그의 아내는 그토록 바래마지 않았던 암소를 받고 너무도 기뻤답니다.
하지만 그들이 원체 가난한 지라 암소에게 줄 먹이가 없어 쫄쫄 굶기다 곧 암소를 죽여야 하고 말았어요.
그들은 고기를 소금에 절였어요.
농부는 시내로 가 암소 가죽을 팔아 그 수익(돈)으로 새 송아지를 한 마리 살 생각이었어요.
가는 도중 물방앗간 옆을 지나가는데, 두 날개가 부러진 큰까마귀 한 마리가 앉아 있기에 불상해 집어서 암소 가죽에 살포시 감싸주었어요.
하지만 날씨가 곧 아무 나빠지고 거기에 비와 강풍을 동반한 폭풍우까지 닫치자, 그는 더 멀리 가지 못하고 물방앗간으로 다시 돌아가 “잠시 몸만 피해있게 해 달라”고 간청했어요.
물방앗간 주인의 아내가 집에 혼자 있다 그 농부에게 말했어요.
“저 밀짚위에서 쉬세요.” 
여자는 그에게 빵과 치즈 한 조각을 그 위에 놓고 갔어요.
농부는 먹은 다음 암소 가죽을 덮고 큰까마귀 옆에 드러누웠어요.
여자가 생각했어요.
“그가 피곤할 테니 금방 자겠지.”
그러는 사이에 ‘목사님’이 도착하셨어요. ‘물방앗간 주인의 아내’가 그를 애틋하게 맞아주었어요. 
그녀가 말했어요.
“남편은 멀리 나갔으니, 오늘 우리 한 번 배터지게 먹어보자구요.”
그 말을 농부가 다 들었어요.
배터지게 먹겠다는 소리를 들으니, 자신이 방금 빵 한 조각과 치즈 한 조각으로 끼니를 때운 게 생각나 짜증이 왕창 났어요. 
그런 다음 여자가 척척 네 가지 요리를 내놓았어요. 구운 고기, 샐러드, 케이트, 포도주요.
그들(아내와 목사님)이 막 자리에 앉아 식사를 하려는데, 밖에서 문 두드리는 소리가 났어요.
여자가 말했어요.
“에구머니나! 남편이 왔나 봐요!”
그녀가 급하게 타일 붙인 난로 속에 구운 고기를 감추고, 베개 아래엔 포도주를 감추고, 침대 위에는 샐러드를 감추고, 침대 아래에는 케이크들을 감추고, 현관 벽장엔 그 목사님을 숨겼어요.
그런 다음 그녀가 문을 열어주며 남편을 맞이하며 말했어요.
“정말 다행이야, 당신이 돌아와서! 폭풍우가 어찌나 심하던지 난 세상이 끝장나는 줄 알았거든.”
그 물방앗간 주인이 밀짚 위에 드러누워 있는 농부를 보더니 물었어요.
“뭐야 저 사람?”
“아,”라며 아내가 말했어요. “폭풍우 속에 길어 가던 불쌍한 사람이야, 비가 너무 많이 와서 하루만 재워 달래, 그래서 내가 빵과 치즈를 조금 주고 저기 있는 밀짚을 쓰라 그랬어.”
남자가 말했어요.
“그러라고 해. 그나저나 얼른 먹을 거나 좀 차려봐. 배고픈 걸.”
여자가 말했어요.
“에구, 먹을 거라고 빵과 치즈뿐인데.”
“그럼 뭐 어째, 그거로라도 배를 채워야지.”라며 남편이 대꾸했어요. “빵과 치즈를 얼른 가져와봐.”
그러더니 농부가 눈에 들어오자 말했어요.
“이보쇼, 와서 같이 먹겠수.”
농부로선 두 번 권할 것까지도 없이 좋았죠. 그래서 일어나 먹었습니다.
그 후 물방앗간 주인의 눈에, 바닥에 누워 있는 큰까마귀를 덮은 가죽이 보이는 거예요.
물방앗간 주인이 물었어요.
“저게 뭐가 있소?”
농부가 대답했어요.
“예언자가 들어있습니다.”
“나에 관한 예언도 할 수 있는감?”라며 물방앗간 주인이 말했어요.
“그럼요?”라며 농부가 대답했어요. “다만 예언은 네 개까지만 들려주고, 다섯 번째 예언은 말해주지 않는답니다.” 
물방앗간 주인이 호기심이 생겨 말했어요.
“그럼 어디 한 번만 해보라고 해보슈.”
그러자 농부가 큰까마귀 머리를 손가락으로 꼬집었어요. 그 바람에 큰까마귀가 우는 소리를 내며 “까악, 까악”거렸어요.
물방앗간 주인이 말했어요.
“뭐랍디까?”
농부가 대답했어요. “우선, 그가 말하길, 베게 아래에 뭔가가 숨어 있다는 군요.”
“당치않은!”라며 물방앗간 주인이 소리치곤 혹시 싶어 거기로 갔다 포도주를 발견했어요.
“계속해보슈.”라며 그가 말했어요.
농부가 큰까마귀를 다시 손가락으로 꼬집었어요, 그리곤 말했어요.
“두 번째로, 타일이 덮인 난로 속에 구운 고기가 있을 거라는군요.”
“어림없지!”라며 물방앗간 주인이 외치곤 거리고 가보니 정말 구운 고기가 나왔어요.
농부가 예언자 큰까마귀를 한 번 더 꼬집은 다음 말했어요.
“세 번째로, 침대 위에 샐러드가 있을 거라 말하는 군요.”
“그렇게만 된다면야!”라며 물방앗간 주인이 소리치고서 거기로 가보곤 정말 샐러드를 발견했어요.
마침내 농부는 큰까마귀가 “까악”하고 비명을 지를 때까지 꼬집더니 말했어요.
“네 번째로, 이 애 말로는, 침대 아래에 케이크가 몇 개 있다는 군요.”
“그렇게만 된다면야!”라며 물방앗간 주인이 소리치곤, 거길 살펴보니, 정말 케이크들이 나왔어요.
이리하여 두 사람이 맛있는 게 가득한 식탁에 함께 자리를 잡고 앉았어요.
하지만 물방앗간 주인은 무서워죽을 거 같아서 모든 집안 열쇠를 쥐곤 침대에 누웠어요.
물방앗간 주인은 다섯 번째 예언이 뭔지도 정말 알고 싶었어요.
하지만 농사꾼 나부랭이가 말했어요.
“우선, 네 가지 음식부터 서둘러 먹읍시다, 왜냐면 다섯 번째 예언은 안 좋거든요.”
그래서 그들이 맛있게 먹었어요.
그런 다음 그들이 이번 다섯 번째 예언 값을 얼마로 할지 흥정을 했어요.
결국 은화 300개로 하기로 서로 합의받어요.
농부가 다시 한 번 큰까마귀의 머리를, 정말이지 큰까마귀가 아파서 “끄악”하고 목청껏 비명을 지를 때까지 꼬집었어요.
물방앗간 주인이 물었어요.
“뭐랍디까?”
농부가 대꾸했어요.
“이 애 말로는, 현관 벽장 속에 사탄이 숨어 있다는 군요.”
물방앗간 주인이 말했어요.
“사탄이라면 쫓아내야지.”
물방앗간 주인이 그가 방문을 열었어요.
그런 다음 아내가 열쇠꾸러미를 내놓게 했어요.
‘농부’(물방앗간 주인이 아니라 농부)가 벽장 열쇠를 열었어요.
그 순간 목사님께서 죽어라 달려 나오더니 줄행랑을 쳐버렸어요.
그러자 물방앗간 주인이 말했어요.
“어라 참말이네, 사탄을 내 눈으로 보게 되다니.”
하지만 농부는 다음날 새벽 일찍 동이 트기 바쁘게 은화 300개를 들고 급히 그곳을 떠나버렸답니다.
집에 돌아온 농부 나부랭이는 점점 운이 트이기 시작했지요.
그는 이제 아름다운 집도 한 채 지었어요.
마을의 다른 농부들이 말했지요.
“아니 기껏 농부 나부랭이가 돈이 어디 있어서 저런 집을 짓는 다냐. 하늘에서 돈다발이 떨어지기라도 한 거여. 아님 저게 천사가 지어준 황금집인 거여.”
마을 사람들은 농사꾼 나부랭이를 끌고 ‘마을이장’(시장)님 앞으로 갔어요.
“네 이놈, 돈이 어디서 생긴 건지 냉큼 말하지 못할까?”
그가 대답했어요.
“시내(읍내)에 가서 암소 가죽을 판 거예요, 은화 300개를 받았어요.” 
마을의 다른 농사꾼들이 이 말을 듣자마자, 서로 자기들이 먼저 횡재를 하려고 집으로 달려가 서로 먼저 자기들의 암소를 죽여 시내에 가지고 가 큰돈을 받고 팔려고 가죽을 벗겼어요.
하지만 ‘마을이장’(시장)님이 말씀하시기를,
“물도 찬 물 더운 물 순서가 있는 법이여. 내 하녀가 먼저 가야 혀!”
마을이장님의 하녀가 시내에 있는 상인에게 가니, 그는 가죽 하나당 은화 2개 이상은 안 주겠다고 했어요.
더구나 뒤이어 다른 사람들까지 도착해 가죽을 들이밀자, 상인은 이제 은화 2개마저도 안 주려고 했어요.
(상인의 대사→) “이 많은 가죽들을 나보고 다 어쩌라고?”
그리되자 마을의 여타 농사꾼(부자)들은 이 농부 나부랭이에게 화가 잔뜩 났어요.
“우리가 그 놈에게 당한 게 분명해. 복수하자. 그 놈을 반역죄로 마을이장(시장)님께 고발하자고.”
이리하여 누명을 뒤집어쓴 농사꾼 나부랭이는 만장일치로 사형 죄가 선고되어, 구멍들이 숭숭 뚫린 통 속에 넣어져 강물로 굴려 보내지는 죽음을 맞이할 예정이었어요.
농사꾼 나부랭이가 앞으로 끌려나왔어요.
그리고 그의 마지막 기도를 들어주기 위해 목사님이 오셨지요.
곧 어쩔 수 없이 다른 사람들이 모두 멀찍이 물러갔어요. 
그러데 농부가 고개를 들어 올려다 보니 그 목사님은 ‘물방앗간 주인의 아내’와 함께 있던 바로 그 남자였어요.
농부가 목사님께 말했어요.
“제가 벽장 속에 갇힌 목사님을 풀어드렸잖아요. 그러니 저 좀 이 통에서 구해주십쇼.”
바로 이때, 한 무리의 양 떼가 언덕을 올라왔어요. 바로 그 양치기는 입만 열면 마을이장님이 되고 싶다고 고래고래 소리를 지르고 다니는 양치기로, 농부도 오랫동안 잘 알고 지내던 양치기였어요. 
그래서 농부가 있는 힘껏 외쳤어요.
“아뇨, 저는 하고 싶지 않아요. 온 세상을 다 준데도, 하고 싶지 않다고요!”
이 말을 들은 양치기가 그에게 오더니 물었어요.
“뭐가요? 뭘 하고 싶지 않다는 건데요?”
농부가 말했어요.
“아 글쎄, 마을 사람들이 나를 마을이장으로 만들고 싶어 난리야, 내가 이 통에 들어가기만 하면 된다면서 말이야, 하지만 난 그러기 싫거든.”
양치기가 말했어요.
“그게 마을이장이 되는 그렇게도 중요한 길이라면, 제가 한 번 들어가 보죠.”
농부가 말했어요.
“자네가 들어가면 마을이장은 자네가 되는 걸세.”
양치기는 기꺼이 들어갔고, 농부는 통의 뚜껑을 닫아버렸죠.
농부는 그런 다음 자신이 마치 그 양치기인양 양 떼를 이끌고 떠나가 버렸어요.
목사님은 마을사람들에게로 가 마지막 기도를 마쳤다고 선언했지요.
그런 다음 그들이 오더니 언덕 위에 있던 통을 강 쪽으로 굴리기 시작했어요.
통이 구르기 시작하자 양치기가 소리쳤어요.
“까짓것 마을이장만 된다면야 이까짓 쯤이야 기꺼이 하지.”
마을사람들은 그 목소리가 농부의 목소리라 생각하고서 대답했어요.
“그게 우리가 바라는 바야, 하지만 우선 네가 어디로 굴러가고 있는지 좀 보라고.”
마을사람들은 세차게 통을 강물 속으로 굴려 빠뜨려버렸어요.
그 후 마을 농부들이 집으로 돌아갔어요. 그들이 막 마을에 들어서려는데, 저기서 농사꾼 나부랭이가 차분히 양 떼를 몰고서 매우 만족한 표정을 지으며 걸어오지 뭐예요.
마을 농부들이 깜짝 놀라하며 말했어요.
“나부랭이, 어디서 오는감? 물속에서 빠져나온 건감?”
“응, 그래.”라며 농부가 대꾸했어요. “점점 더 깊이 빠져들더군, 그러다 바닥까지 찍었지. 그런 다음 바닥을 밀고 통에서 나와 물 위로 나오니. 푸른(녹색) 풀밭들 위에 수많은 양 때들이 풀을 뜯고 있지 않은 감, 그 중에서 이 양 떼만 끌고 온 거라네.”
마을 농부들이 말했어요.
“아직 거기 양 떼들이 더 있는감?” 
“오, 그렇고말고.”라며 농부가 말했어요. “남아돈다니깐.”
마을 농부들이 자신들도 가서 한 사람씩 양 떼들을 끌고 오리라 결심들을 했어요.
하지만 마을이장(시장)님이 말했어요.
“내가 먼저여.”
그래서 그들이 다함께 강가로 갔어요.
때마침 그때 푸른 하늘에 ‘작은 양털 구름’(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/NT79VX )이 수북이 떠있었어요. 그 양털 구름들이 수면 위에 반사된 나머지 어린 양들처럼 보였어요.
마을 농부들이 그 때문에 소리쳤어요.
“저 아래에 양 떼들이 수북한걸!”
마을이장님께서 사람들을 밀치며 말했어요.
“내가 먼저 내려갈 거여, 내가 먼저 가 살펴보고 이상 없으면 부를 테니 꺼져들 있거라고.” 
그래서 그가 뛰어들었어요.
“첨벙!”
그가 물에 가라앉기 시작했어요.
순간 그가 뭐라 소리를 했는데 마치 그게 사람들보고 오라는 소리 같아, 마을 사람 모두가 이장님을 따라 강물 속에 뛰어들었지요.
그리하여 마을 사람 전체가 물에 빠져 죽고 말았어요.
그리되니 농사꾼 나부랭이가 그 마을의 유일한 후계자 겸 상속인이 되었어요. 
그래서 그는 엄청난 부자가 되었답니다. 

(동화 끝)

동화 「농사꾼 나부랭이」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「농사꾼 나부랭이」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter61.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



62. 여왕벌



한번은 두 왕자가 모험을 찾아서 여행을 떠났어요. 그러다 세상의 문란한 생활방식에 빠져 두 번 다시 집에 돌아오지 않았지요.
얼간이라 불리는 막내가 형들을 찾아 나섰어요. 
하지만 형들을 찾긴 찾았는데, 형들이 그보고 “얼간이가 헤쳐 나갈 수 있는 세상이 아냐, 훨씬 똑똑한 우리 둘도 제 살길을 찾지 못하고 있는데 말이야.”라고 놀렸어요.
그들 셋이 함께 여행을 떠났어요.
그러다 개미총(개미집을 지으러 파낸 땅속의 흙이 구멍 주위에 수북이 쌓인 거)이 하나 나왔어요.
공포에 싸인 작은 개미들이 기어 나와 알들을 옮기는 걸 보고 싶다며, 두 형이 그걸 무너뜨리려 했어요.
하지만 얼간이(막내)가 말했어요.
“생명을 존중해. 그들을 훼방 놓는 꼴은 내가 못 봐.”
그런 다음 그들이 계속 나아가니 이번엔 호수가 하나 나왔는데, 그 위에 수많은 오리들이 노닐고 있었어요.
두 마리만 잡아 통구이를 해먹고 싶다며, 두 형이 잡고 싶어 했어요.
하지만 얼간이(막내)가 허락지 않으며 말했어요.
“생명을 존중해. 그들을 죽이는 꼴은 내가 못 봐.”
그들은 마침내 벌집 하나와도 마주쳤어요.
그 안엔 수많은 벌꿀이 넘치다 못해 너무 줄기를 타고 흘러내릴 정도였어요.
꿀을 빼앗겠다며, 두 형이 나무 아래에 불을 피워 벌들을 질식시키려고 했어요.
하지만 얼간이(막내)가 또 그들을 제지하며 말했어요.
“생명을 존중해. 그들을 태우는 꼴은 내가 못 봐.”
마침내 세 형제는 어느 성에 도착했어요.
그 성안의 마구간들엔 돌로 된 말들이 서 있고, 성 안 어디에도 사람의 그림자는 눈을 씻고 봐도 없었지요.
그들이 모든 홀들을 통과해 맨 끝에 도착하니 자물쇠가 세 개나 달린 문이 하나 나왔어요.
다만 문 중앙에 작은 창유리가 하나 있어, 그걸 통해 형제가 방안을 엿보니, 회색 난쟁이 한 명이 식탁에 앉아 있었어요.
그들이 한 번, 두 번 밖에서 불러보았지만 그는 듣지 못했어요.
마침내 그들이 세 번째로 부르자 그가 일어나더니 자물쇠들을 열고 밖으로 나왔어요.
하지만 그는 아무 말이 없었어요. 단지 그들을 한 상 푸짐하게 차려진 식탁으로 안내했어요. 
그들이 거나하게 먹고 마시자, 그가 한 사람씩 침실로 안내해주었어요.
다음날 아침 회색 난쟁이가 첫째 방으로 들어오더니 손짓으로 자신을 따라오라 말했어요.
그가 첫째를 데리고 어느 돌판 앞으로 갔어요.
거기엔 세 가지 임무가 새겨져 있었어요. 성을 구하기 위해선 반드시 해야 하는 임무였지요.
첫 번째 임무는 숲으로 가서 이끼 아래에 숨어있는 공주님의 진주 천 개를 모두 주어 담는 거였어요. 
만약 해질녘까지 진주 하나라도 모자라면 진주를 찾던 사람이 돌로 변하고 마는 임무였어요.
첫째가 거리로 가 하루 온 종일 찾아보았지만, 결국 백 개까지밖에 성공하지 못해, 돌판에 새겨진 대로 돌로 변하고 말았어요.
다음 날, 둘째가 그 모험에 착수했어요. 하지만 첫째와 상황이 별반 나아지지 않았어요. 그는 2백 개까지만 모으고 결국 돌로 변해버렸어요. 
마침내 얼간이(막내) 차례가 되었어요.
그도 이끼 속에서 공주님의 진주들을 찾았어요.
하지만 진주를 찾는 게 너무 힘들고 속도도 점점 느려져 결국 돌 위에 주저앉아 울고 말았어요.
그가 앉아 우는 사이, 일전에 얼간이 덕에 목숨을 구한 개미집의 개미 왕께서 부하 5천 명을 데리고 도착해 진주를 싹 다 모아 수북이 쌓아두었어요.
하지만 두 번째 임무는 호수에서 공주님의 침실 열쇠를 건져오는 거였어요.
얼간이가 호수가 갔을 때, 얼간이가 구해준 오리들이 이곳까지 헤엄쳐 와서 다이빙을 헤 물속에서 그 열쇠를 건져주었어요.
하지만 세 번째 임무가 가장 어려웠어요.
잠들어 계시는 세 명의 공주님들 사이에서 가장 아름다운 막내 공주를 찾는 일이었지요.
하지만 공주님들을 정말로 똑같이 생기셔서, 그들이 잠들기 전 먹은 서로 다른 단것으로만 구별해내야 했어요.
첫째 공주님은 설탕을 한 조각 드셨고요, 둘째 공주님은 시럽(단 음료)을 조금 드셨고요, 막내 공주님은 꿀을 한 스푼 드셨어요.
그때 얼간이(막내)가 불로부터 방어해준 여왕벌님께서 날아오시더니 세 공주님들의 입술을 맛보시곤 마침내 꿀을 드신 막내 공주님의 입술에 살며시 앉으셨어요. 
그런 까닭에 왕자(막내 왕자)는 누가 막내 공주님인가를 알아맞힐 수 있었답니다. 
그 순간 마법이 풀렸어요.
모든 게 잠에서 깨어났지요.
그리고 돌로 변했었던 사람들도 다시 사람으로 돌아왔어요.
얼간이(막내)는 가장 사랑스러운 막내 공주님과 결혼식을 올렸답니다.
그리고 공주님의 아빠가 돌아가신 다음에는 왕이 되셨지요.
두 형들도 막내공주의 두 언니들과 각각 결혼식을 올렸답니다.

(동화 끝)

동화 「여왕벌」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「여왕벌」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter62.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



63. 세 개의 깃털



옛날 옛적에 세 아들을 둔 국왕이 살고 계셨어요.
둘은 영리하고 총명한데, 막내는 말도 제대로 못하고 단순해 그냥 바보라고 불렸어요.
왕이 나이 드시어 쇠약해져 감에 따라 죽음을 생각하시게 되었는데, 아무리 생각해도 자기가 죽은 다음 어느 아들에게 왕국을 물려줘야 할지 모르겠는 거예요.
그래서 왕이 그들을 불러 말했어요.
“가거라, 가서 이 세상에서 가장 아름다운 양탄자를 가져오거라, 그걸 가져오는 아이에게 내가 죽은 후 왕국을 물려주겠다.”
나중에 군말이 없도록 하기 위해, 왕은 그들을 성 밖으로 데려고 가 허공에 깃털 세 개를 후 불러 날리며 말했어요.
“깃털이 부는 방향대로 가거라.”
깃털 한 개는 동쪽으로 날아갔어요, 또 한 개를 서쪽으로 날아갔고요, 하지만 세 번째로 분 깃털만은 곧장 위로 날아가더니 더는 나아가지 못하고 곧 땅바닥에 떨어지고 말았죠.
그리하여 첫째는 오른쪽방향으로 가고, 둘째는 왼쪽방향으로 가며, 바보(막내)를 비웃었어요. 세 번째 깃털이 떨어진 그곳에 머물러야하니까요.
바보가 주저앉아 슬퍼하고 있는데 순간 깃털 가까이에 뚜껑문 하나가 보이지 뭐예요.
그가 그걸 들어 올리니 계단이 보였어요. 계단을 밟고 내려가니 이번엔 또 다른 문이 나왔어요. 그가 똑똑 노크를 했어요. 그러자 안에서 누가 호출하는 소리가 들렸어요.
“작은 초록색 처녀(두꺼비)야, 여기 저기 폴짝 폴짝 뛰어가,
문을 열고, 누가 왔는지 재빨리 보고 오느라.”
문이 열렸어요.
크고 뚱뚱한 두꺼비 한 마리가 앉아 있고, 그녀 주변으로 한 무리의 새끼 두꺼비들이 있는 게 바보 눈에 들어왔어요.
뚱뚱한 두꺼비가 “어인 일인가요?”라고 물었어요.
바보가 “세상에서 가장 예쁘고 정교한 양탄자를 가져와야 해서요.”라고 대답해주었지요.
그러자 그녀(두꺼비)가 어린 것(두꺼비) 하나에게 말했어요.
“작은 초록색 처녀(두꺼비)야, 여기 저기 폴짝 폴짝 뛰어가,
문을 열고, 큼직한 보물 상자를 내게 갖다 주렴.”
어린 두꺼비가 상자를 가져왔어요.
뚱뚱한 두꺼비가 그걸 열더니 그 안에서 양탄자 하나를 꺼내 바보에게 건네주었어요.
정말이지 아름답고도 정교한, 이 세상 어느 누구도 짠(만든) 적이 없는 그런 양탄자였어요.
그런 다음 바보가 그녀에게 “고맙습니다.”라고 말씀드린 후 다시 위로 올라왔어요.
하지만 두 형들은 막내를 워낙에 같잖게 보았기 때문에 “어리석은 애가 뭘 알겠어, 아마 아무것도 가져오지 않을 거야.”라고 믿었어요.
“그나저나 우리가 왜 시간과 노력을 들여가며 그딴 걸 찾아야해?”라며 그들은 말했어요.
그리곤 그들이 마주친 첫 번째 양치기의 아내들에게서 다소 거친 손수건을 몇 장 얻어가지고 왕이 계신 집으로 돌아왔어요.
형들과 동시에 바보도 아름다운 그 양탄자를 들고서 돌아왔어요.
왕이 그 양탄자를 보더니 말씀하셨어요.
“정당한 판결에 의해, 왕국은 막내아들이 물려받는다.”
그러자 두 형들이 아빠에게 때를 쓰며 말했어요.
“아부지, 이해력도 부족한 저딴 바보가 무슨 나라를 통치한다는 거예요. 저희들이 수긍할 수 있는 다른 시험을 내주세요.”
그래서 아빠가 말했어요.
“가장 아름다운 반지를 가져오는 아들이 왕국을 물려받을게다.”
아빠는 세 아들들을 밖으로 데려가 세 개의 깃털들을 공중에다 휴 하고 불어 날아간 방향대로 아들들이 가게 했어요.
두형들은 다시 서쪽과 동쪽으로 갔어요.
바보 순번의 깃털은 이번에도 곧장 위로 날더니 아래로 떨어졌어요. 그 가까이에 땅속을 가는 그 문이 있잖아요.
그런 다음 바보가 다시 아래로 내려가 뚱뚱한 두꺼비를 만나 “가장 아름다운 반지를 구해야 해요.”라고 말씀드렸어요.
그녀(뚱뚱한 두꺼비)가 즉시 큼직한 보물 상자를 가져오게 했어요. 그녀는 거기서 반지를 하나 꺼내더니 바보에게 주었어요. 보석들이 반짝반짝 빛나는 반지였지요, 도저히 이 세상의 금세공인 기술로는 만들 수 없을 거 같이 아름다운 반지였어요.
두 형들은 이번에도 바보를 비웃었어요.
“꼴에 바보 주제에 황금 반지를 구하러 가다니.”
왜냐면 그들은 전혀 고생할 마음이 없었거든요. 그들은 낡은 마차 바퀴 가운데에 뚫린 구멍에 끼워진 쇠막대에서 쇠못을 떼어내 가지고 왕에게 갔어요.
하지만 바보가 가져온 황금처럼 빛나는 반지를 본 아빠가 다시 말했어요.
“왕국은 그에게 물려줄 것이다.”
두 형은 국왕이 세 번째 시험을 내겠다고 할 때까지 부단히도 아빠를 괴롭혔어요.
결국 왕이 선언했어요.
“가장 아름다운 여인을 집으로 데려오는 아들에게 왕국을 물려주겠노라.”
그는 다시 세 개의 깃털들을 공중에 날렸어요, 깃털들이 앞서와 같이 날아갔어요.
이번에도 바보는 아래로 내려가 뚱뚱한 두꺼비에게 말했어요.
“가장 아름다운 여인을 집에 데려가야 해서요!”
“오,”라며 그 두꺼비가 대답했어요. “가장 아름다운 여인이라! 이번만은 지금 바로는 안 된다, 다만 그래도 넌 그 여인을 얻게 될 게다.”
그녀(두꺼비)가 속을 움푹하게 파낸 노란 ‘순무’(먹는 무의 일종. 사진링크▶ http://me2.do/GEBhvbFM )에 생쥐 여섯 마리를 매달더니 바보에게 건네주었어요.
그러자 바보가 엄청 슬픔에 잠겨 말했지요.
“저보고 이걸로 어쩌라고요?”
두꺼비가 대답했어요.
“내 어린 두꺼비들 중 한 명을 그 안에 올려놓아 보거라.” 
그래서 바보가 빙 둘러 앉아 있던 두꺼비들 중 아무나 한 명을 집어 그녀(어린 두꺼비)를 노랑 마차 안에 올려보았어요.
그녀(어린 두꺼비)가 자리에 착석하자마자 놀랍도록 아름다운 아가씨로 변했고, 순무는 마차로, 여섯 마리의 생쥐들은 말들로 변했답니다.
그래서 바보가 그녀(어린 두꺼비 아가씨)에게 키스를 하곤, 재빨리 말들을 몰고 출발해 왕에게 그녀를 데리고 갔어요.
그 후 형들도 도착했어요. 그들은 아름다운 소녀를 찾는데 골머리를 앓을 생각이 전혀 없었어요. 그래서 그냥 그들이 길을 가다 우연히 마주친 첫 번째 시골 여인을 데리고 왔어요.
왕이 여인들을 보자 말했어요.
“내가 죽은 후 왕국은 막내아들의 소유가 될 것이다.”
그리되자 이번에도 두 형들은 갖 불평들을 늘여놓아 왕의 귀청이 터져나갈 정도였어요.
“저희들은 바보가 왕이 되는 것에 동의해드릴 수 없습니다.”
그리곤 새롭게 제안하기를,
“‘홀’(넓은 공간) 중앙에 매달린 큰 원을 뛰어넘을 수 있는 여인이어야 왕비가 될 자격이 있습니다.”
라고 했어요.
그들은 생각했지요.
‘우리가 데려온 시골 여인들이라면 충분히 강인하니 그걸 쉽게 뛰어넘겠지만, 저 아리따운 처녀는 점프하다 떨어져 죽을 수도 있다 이거야.’
나이 드신 국왕께서도 그 시험에 동의하셨어요.
그래서 두 시골 여인이 먼저 점프를 했는데, 그만 그 큰 원 속을 점프해 통과하려다 몸이 너무 굳어있어 떨어지는 바람에 그녀들의 거친 팔들과 다리들이 부러져 두 동강이 나고 말았어요.
그런 다음 바보와 함께 온 예쁜 처녀가 마치 한 마리 암사슴처럼 가볍게 점프해 그 원을 통과했지요.
그러자 모든 반대들이 수그러지고 말았답니다.
그리하여 바보(막내)가 왕관을 받게 되었어요. 그는 오래오래 동안 왕국을 지혜롭게 잘 통치하였답니다. 

(동화 끝)

동화 「세 개의 깃털」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「세 개의 깃털」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter63.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



64. 황금 거위



세 아들을 가진 아버지가 살고 있었어요.
그 중 막내는 놀림조로 ‘바보’(원문은 말을 못하는 사람을 비하하는 단어임)라고 불렸어요. 사사건건 놀림을 많이 당했죠. 
우연히 장남이 나무를 베러 숲으로 가게 되었어요.
엄마는 장남이 일을 하다 배가 고프거나 목이 마르지 않게 장남에게 단 케이크 하나와 와인 한 병을 싸주셨어요.
장남이 숲에 들어가니 머리가 ‘센’(=회색인) 노인 한 명이 인사말을 건네며 말하길,
“내게 자네 주머니에 있는 케이크를 한 조각 주게, 자네 와인도 한 모금 마실 수 있게 해주고 말이네. 난 너무 배고프고 목이 말라.”
하지만 어떤 행동을 하기 전에 이해득실을 먼저 따지는 장남이 대답하길,
“내 케이크와 와인을 당신께 주고 나면, 그럼 전 뭘 마시라고요. 저리 가세요 아저씨.”
그래서 장남은 그 대수롭지 않은 노인이 서 있는 자리를 떠나 가던 길을 계속 갔다. 
하지만 장남은 나무를 베기 시작하자마자 도끼를 잘못 찍어 자신의 팔을 찍고 말았다. 
그 바람에 집으로 와 붕대를 감아야했다. 
물론 도끼를 잘못 찍게 한 건 아까 그 노인이 한 일이었다. 
그 후 둘째가 숲으로 가게 되자, 엄마는 장남에게 해주었던 것처럼, 케이크 하나와 와인 한 병을 싸 주셨다. 
대수롭지 않아 보이는 노인이 둘째를 보더니 마찬가지로 “내게 케이크 한 조각과 와인 한 모금만 주제.”라고 말했다.
하지만 둘째 역시 여러 가지 이유로 이렇게 말했다. 
“내가 먹을 것도 없는데 무슨 소리세요, 저리 가세요!”
그런 다음 그 시시한 노인이 서 있게 남겨두고 가던 길을 계속 갔다. 
하지만 노인을 공경하지 않은 둘째의 행동에 대한 벌은 오래 걸리지 않았다. 
나무를 몇 번 찍지 않았는데 그만 자신의 다리를 찍었던 것이다. 
그래서 둘째는 들것에 실려 집으로 와야했다.   
그렇게 되자 바보가 말했다. 
“아부지, 저도 가서 나무 벨래요.”
아버지가 대답했다. 
“네 잘난 형들도 다쳤다, 관 두어라, 넌 아무 것도 모르지 않니.”
하지만 바보는 굳이 가겠다고 박박 우겼어요.
마침내 아버지도 말했어요.
“그럼 가 봐라, 다만 넌 다치지 않도록 더 조심해야한다.”
엄마는 아들에게, 음식찌꺼기와 물로 대충 만든 케이크 하나와, 신 맥주 한 병을 싸주셨어요.
바보가 숲에 도착해, 마찬가지로, 머리 ‘센’(회색인) 노인을 만났어요. 
노인이 인사를 건네며 말했어요.
“내게 자네 케이크 한 조각과 병에든 거 한 모금만 마시게 해주게나. 난 지금 너무 배고프고 목이 마르다네.”
바보가 대답했어요.
“음식찌꺼기로 된 빵과 신 맥주만 있는데요. 괜찮다면, 같이 앉아 먹어요.”
그래서 그들은 앉았어요.
이어서 바보가 음식찌꺼기로 된 빵을 꺼냈는데 아니 이건 달콤한 케이크이지 뭐예요.
그리고 신 맥주는 어느새 좋은 와인으로 변해있었어요.
그래서 그들은 맛있게 먹고 맛나게 마셨답니다.
다 먹은 후 노인이 말했어요.
“네가 가진 걸 기꺼이 나눠주는 걸 보니 넌 심성이 곱구나, 그래서 내 너에게 행운을 주겠다. 저기 늙은 나무가 하나 서 있지. 그걸 베어라. 그럼 뿌리에서 뭔가를 발견하게 될 것이다.”
그런 다음 노인은 가버렸습니다.
바보가 가서 그 나무를 베었어요.
나무가 쓰러진 자리의 뿌리에는 황금 깃털을 지닌 거위가 한 마리 앉아 있었어요.
바보는 황금 거위를 들어 가지고 주막으로 갔어요.
거기서 하룻밤을 묵을 생각이었거든요.
주막 주인에겐 세 명의 딸들이 있었어요. 
딸들이 거위를 보니 세상에 이런 놀라운 새가 다 있나 심을 정도로 호기심이 일어 황금 깃털 하나만 가지고 싶어졌어요.
큰딸은 생각했어요.
‘기회를 봤다가 깃털 하나만 뽑아야지.’
그래서 바보가 자리를 떠자 마자 큰딸은 황금 거위의 날개를 붙잡았어요.
그런데 그녀의 손가락이 황금 거위에게 딱 달라붙어서는 안 떨어지는 거예요.
곧 어떻게 하면 깃털을 하나 빼돌릴까만 생각하고 있던 두 번째 딸이 오더니 언니가 황금 거위를 쥐고 있는 것을 보곤 자신도 깃털을 뽑겠다며 언니를 건들다 달라붙고 말았어요.
마지막으로 막내딸도 똑같은 의도로 다가왔어요.
그래서 언니들이 다가오지 말라고 소리소리 질렀어요.
“안 돼, 오면 안 돼. 제발 넌 떨어져 있어!”
하지만 막내는 왜 자기보고 떨어져 있으라는지 이해하지 못했어요.
‘언니들이 다 가지려고,’라고만 생각한 막내가, “거긴 내 몫도 있다고.”라며 언니들에게 달려갔어요.
막내가 언니를 건들자마자 그녀도 언니들에게 딱 달라붙었어요.
그래서 그녀들은 그날 밤을 황금 거위와 함께 보내야만했답니다.
다음날 아침 바보는, 황금 거위에게 세 명의 여자들이 매달려 있다는 것에는 전혀 신경 쓰지 않고서, 황금 거위를 팔에 끼고 출발했어요.
그녀들은 계속해서 바보를 뒤쫓아가야했답니다. 
왼쪽이면 왼쪽, 오른쪽이면 오른쪽으로 말이죠.
바보가 가는 쪽은 어디로든지요.
들판 한 복판에서 목사님이 이들과 만났어요.
목사님이 이 광경을 보곤 말씀하셨어요.
“부끄러운 줄 알아야지, 젊은 처녀들이 변변치 못하게 시리, 젊은 남자 뒤를 쫓아 온 들판을 건너고 있네? 그런 거 아냐?”
목사님이 막내딸을 때어내기 위해 막내딸의 손을 잡자마자 그도 또한 마찬가지로 달라붙고 말았어요.
그래서 목사님도 그들 뒤를 쫓아다녀야했어요. 
오래지 않아, 교회의 머슴이 오다가 자신의 주인인 목사님이 세 여자 꽁무니를 쫓아다니고 있는 것을 보았다. 
이에 교회의 머슴이 탄식을 하며 소리를 질렀다. 
“오, 목사님이시어, 어디를 그리 급히 가시나이까? 오늘 세례식이 있다는 걸 정녕 잊으신 겝니까!”
교회의 머슴이 달려오더니 목사님의 소매를 확 붙잡았다. 
하지만 머슴 또한 이 행렬에 붙고 말았다.  
이렇게 하나 뒤에 붙어서 다섯 명이 급히 가고 있는데, 들판에서 일하던 두 명의 농부들이 괭이를 어깨에 걸치고서 다가왔다. 
목사님이 그 두 농부를 불러,
“이보게나, 제발 나와 여기 이 머슴을 좀 떼어주게나.”
하지만 두 농부가 머슴에게 손을 대자마자 그들도 철썩하고 달라붙고 말았다. 
이리하여 일곱 명이서 바보와 황금 거위 뒤를 따라가는 형국이 되었다. 

( ■ 알림 : 아래부터는 “애들레이드대학교 도서관(인터넷사이트)에 있는 「황금 거위」”(동화 뒷부분 내용이 ‘없’음) 대신, “구텐베르크 프로젝트(무료로 영어소설 볼 수 있는 사이트)에 있는 「황금 거위」”(동화 뒷부분 내용이 ‘있’음)를 기준으로 해석하겠습니다. )

(앞부분에 이어서 계속 해석 시작)

이내 곧 바보는 도시로 들어섰어요. 
그곳은 너무도 심각해서 아무도 그녀를 웃길 수 없는 딸을 둔 왕이 사는 곳이었어요.
그래서 왕은 선포하기를,
“누구든 내 딸을 웃게 할 수 있다면 내 딸과 결혼시켜주겠다.”
라고 했어요.
이 소식을 바보도 듣게 된 거예요.
그래서 자신의 황금거위와 일행을 데리고 왕의 딸 앞으로 갔어요.
한 사람 뒤에 또 한 사람이 계속 이어진 이 일곱 명의 모습을 공주는 보자마자 아주 통쾌하다는 듯 웃기 시작하더니 절대 웃음을 멈추지 않겠다는 듯 웃는 거예요.
그런 까닭에 바보는 “따님을 주십시오.”라고 왕께 요구했어요.
그런데 왕이 가만 보니 바보도 이런 바보가 없을 정도로 바보라 사위로 삼고 싶지가 않았어요.
그래서 온갖 핑계거리를 만들어 거절할 셈으로, 
첫 번째 문제를 내기를,
“지하 저장실에 가득 찬 와인을 다 마실 수 있는 사람을 데려오면 내 한 번 생각해보겠다.”
라고 했어요.
그 말에 바보가 머리가 센 노인을 떠올렸어요. 그 노인이라면 확실히 자신을 도와줄 것 같았거든요.
그래서 바보가 숲으로 들어가니 바보가 나무를 베었던 같은 장소에 그 노인분이 아주 슬픈 듯한 얼굴로 앉아 있는 거예요.
“무엇이 노인을 그리 속상하게 합니까?”라고 바보가 물었어요.
노인분이 대답하기를,
“갈증(=목마름)이 너무도 심한데 풀길이 없어 그러하다. 차가운 물로도 풀리지 않고, 포도주통 한 통을 다 마셔도 채워지지 않다. 내게는 그러한 것들이 뜨거운 돌 위에 떨어진 한 방울의 물 같구나!”
라고 말했어요.
“그렇담, 저를 도와줄 수 있겠네요.”라고 바보가 말했어요. “저와 같이 가시기만 하면 당신은 크게 만족하실 겁니다.”
바보는 그 노인을 데리고 왕의 지하저장실로 갔어요.
노인은 거대한 통들 위로 허리를 굽히더니 허리가 휠 정도로까지 마시기 시작했어요.
날이 샐 무렵이 되자 지하저장실 안에 있던 모든 통들이 바닥이 났어요.
그래서 바보는 한 번 더 왕께 “신부를 달라”고 요구했어요.
하지만 왕은 정말이지 이렇게 못생긴 찌질이(=바보)에게 딸을 주기가 넘 싫었어요.
게다가 그는 모두가 바보라 놀리는 자인데, 자칫하면 자신의 딸을 데려갈 판이니까요.
그래서 왕이 한 번 더 제안을 냈어요. 
“산처럼 쌓여있는 빵을 먹을 수 있는 사람을 찾아오거라.”
바보는 길게 생각하지 않았어요. 그냥 곧장 숲으로 갔어요. 허리띠로 복근 운동을 하며 더부룩해하고 있는 노인이 역시 같은 장소에 앉아 있었어요.
노인이 말했어요.
“방금 엄청 많은 롤빵(=긴빵)을 먹었는데도 여전히 허기지다는 거다. 내게 좋은 건 그런 배고픔을 느낀다는 게 아닐까 한다. 그래서 굶어죽지 않게 허리띠로 배를 졸라매고 있었다.” 
그 말에 바보는 기뻐서 말했다. 
“일어나셔서 저와 함께 가요. 배 터지도록 드실 수 있게 해드릴게요.”
노인이 바보를 따라 온 왕국에서 받아온 밀가루가 가득 찬 왕궁으로 갔어요.
왕은 산더미 같은 빵을 굽게 했어요.
숲에서 온 노인이 다 구워진 빵 앞에 서서는 먹기 시작해 날이 저물 무렵엔 산더미 같이 쌓여 있던 빵들이 온데간데없고 말았어요.
그러자 바보가 세 번째로 “신부를 주세요.”라고 요구했어요.
하지만 왕은 다시 괴를 부리기 시작했어요. 그래서 “육지 위에서도 바다 위에서도 항해할 수 있는 배를 구해오라.”라고 말했어요.
“그런 배를 타고 온다면, 그 즉시,”라며 왕이 말했어요. “내 딸을 네 아내로 삼아주겠다.”
바보는 이번에도 숲으로 곧장 갔어요.
거기에, 바보가 자신의 케이크를 주었던 머리 ‘센’(=회색인) 노인이 앉아 있었어요.
바보의 소원을 들은 노인이 말했어요.
“내게 먹을 것과 마실 걸 준 대가로, 네게 배를 주겠다. 내가 이르는 이유는 모두 네가 내게 친절을 베풀었기 때문이다.”
그러더니 노인은 육지 위에서도 바다 위에서도 항해를 할 수 있는 배를 바보에게 주었어요.
그 배를 타고 나타난 바보를 본 왕은 정말 더는 바보가 자신의 딸과 결혼하는 것을 방해할 수 없었어요.
그래서 결혼식은 성대히 치러졌답니다.   
그리고 왕이 죽은 후, 바보가 왕국의 통치를 이어받아 자신의 아내와 함께 행복하게 오래오래 살았대요~♥

(끝)

동화 「황금 거위」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「황금 거위」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter64.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



65. 털북숭이 공주



옛날 옛적에 황금처럼 빛나는 머리카락을 지닌 아내를 둔 왕이 살고 있었어요.
그녀는 너무도 아름다웠기에 그녀의 미모에 비길 여인을 지구상에서는 찾을 수 없을 정도였지요.
그러던 어느 날 그녀가 병져 눕게 되었어요.
곧 죽음이 가까웠음을 직감한 그녀가 왕을 불러 말했어요.
“제가 죽은 후 재혼을 하실 생각이시면, 저만큼이나 아름답고, 저와 같이 황금처럼 빛나는 머리카락을 지닌 여인과만 결혼을 하셔야합니다. 제게 그러겠다, 약속해주세요.”
왕이 약속하자, 그녀가 두 눈을 감고 생을 마감했습니다. 
오랫동안 왕은 슬픔에 겨워 다른 여자 생각을 할 틈이 없었어요.
마침내 신하들이 말했어요.
“왕은 재혼을 하셔야합니다. 나라엔 왕비가 필요합니다. 이것은 피할 수 없습니다.”
그리하여 사신(심부름꾼)들이 전국방방곳곳에 보내져 돌아가신 왕비만큼이나 미모면에서 동급인 신부를 찾았습니다.
하지만 세상 어디에도 그만한 미인은 없었어요.
심지어 한 명 찾긴 찾았는데, 그녀는 황금처럼 빛나는 머리카락이 아니었어요.
그래서 사신들은 허송세월 다 보내다 그냥 궁전으로 돌아와야 했지요.
때마침 왕에겐 딸이 한 명 있었어요. 그녀는 돌아가신 엄마만큼이나 아름답고 황금처럼 빛나는 머리카락도 가지고 있었어요.
그녀가 자라 어른이 되자, 어느 날 왕이 그녀를 찬찬히 살펴보다 모든 면에서 자신의 죽은 아내와 똑같은 걸 발견하곤, 불연 듯 그녀에게 불같은 사랑을 느끼고 말았어요.
그때 왕이 신하들에게 말했어요.
“나는 내 딸과 결혼할 것이다. 왜냐면 그 애가 모든 면에서 죽은 아내와 동급이기 때문이다. 그렇지 않음 백년이 가도 합당한 신부를 찾지 못할 것이기 때문이다.”
이 말을 들은 신하들은 충격을 받은 나머지 말했어요.
“아빠가 딸과 결혼하는 것은 하느님이 금지하는 바입니다. 그런 죄악에서 좋은 결말이 나올 리 없습니다. 왕국이 천벌을 받아 파멸할 수도 있나이다.”
아빠의 결심을 전해 듣고서 누구보다도 충격을 먹은 건 딸이었어요.
그래서 아빠의 생각을 돌리려고 소망했어요.
그녀가 아빠에게 말했어요.
“아빠의 바람이 실현되기 전에, 저는 옷 세 벌을 가져야겠어요. 하나는 해처럼 빛나는 황금빛 옷이고, 또 하나는 달처럼 빛나는 은빛 옷이고, 나머지 하나는 별처럼 빛나는 별빛 옷이에요. 또한 왕국에서 나는 모든 종류의 동물 각각 한 마리의 가죽에서 한 조각씩만 떼어내 한데 모아 맞춘 수천 종류의 털로 된 망토를 만들어주셔야 해요.”    
그러면서 그녀는 생각했어요.
“무슨 수를 쓰서라도 이런 옷들을 만드는 건 불가능해, 그러는 사이 아빠도 나쁜 생각을 떨쳐버릴 수 있을 거야.”
하지만 왕은 포기하지 않았어요. 그래서 왕국 안에 있는 가장 솜씨 좋은 처녀들은 모두 세 옷을 짜야 했어요. 황금빛 옷과, 달빛 옷과, 별빛 옷이 그것이었지요. 그리고 왕의 사냥꾼들은 왕국에서 자라는 수많은 동물들을 동물종류별로 각각 한 마리씩 잡아야했어요. 
결국 동물들이 잡히고, 가죽이 한 조각이 떼어지고, 이 가죽들을 모아 맞춘 털북숭이 망토가 만들어졌지요.
마침내 모든 게 준비되자, 왕이 털북숭이 망토를 가져와 공주 앞에 펼쳐보이며 말했어요.
“결혼식은 내일 거행할 것이다.” 
이리하여 아빠의 마음을 돌릴 길이 요원해진 공주가 떠나기로 결심했어요.
밤에 모두가 잠든 사이, 그녀는 일어나 보물들 중 세 가지만 챙겼어요. 황금반지 하나와, 황금 ‘물레’(실을 잣는 재래식 기구. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/nRjxOi ) 하나와, 황금 ‘얼레’(실 감는 거. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/g3XZOf ) 하나 이렇게요.
황금빛, 달빛, 별빛 옷들도 각각 챙겨 아주 작은 그릇 속에 넣고, 자신은 털북숭이 망토를 입고, 얼굴과 손엔 ‘검댕’(=그을음. 검은 물질)으로 검게 칠을 했답니다.
그런 다음 모든 걸 하느님께 맡기고 길을 떠났지요.
그녀는 울창한 숲에 다다를 때까지 온밤을 걷고 또 걸었답니다.
너무 지치자 그녀는 속이 빈 나무속에 들어가 그대로 잠이 들었지요.
해가 떠올랐어요. 그래도 그녀는 계속 잠들었지요. 하루가 다 가도록 그녀는 여전히 잠들어 있었어요.
그때 이 숲을 소유한 왕(공주의 아빠가 아니라 다른 왕임)이 사냥을 하고 있었어요.
왕의 개들이 그 나무에 와 코를 킁킁거리며 주변을 빙글빙글 돌며 짓기 시작했어요.
왕이 사냥꾼들에게 말했어요.
“무슨 종류의 야생 짐승이 저 안에 숨어 있나만 보고 오거라.”
사냥꾼들이 지시에 따랐어요. 그들은 돌아와 말했어요.
“어떤 요상한 짐승이 속이 빈 나무속에 누워 있습니다요. 저희도 생전 처음 보는 동물인데. 글쎄 가죽은 털북숭이 같은데 쿨쿨 잠은 잘도 자네요.”
왕이 말했어요.
“그럼 산 채로 잡도록 해라, 마차에 묶어, 돌아갈 때 같이 데려 가자구나.”
사냥꾼들이 그 처녀를 붙잡았어요.
그녀는 화들짝 놀라 그들에게 말했어요.
“저는 어려서 부모님을 잃은 불쌍한 아이랍니다, 저를 불쌍히 여기시고 데려가주세요.”
그러자 그들이 말했어요.
“털북숭이군, 부엌데기(식모)로 쓰면 유용하겠군, 따라와라, 잿더미는 쓸 수 있겠지.”
그래서 그들이 그녀를 마차에 태우고 궁전이 있는 집으로 돌아왔답니다.
그들은 그녀에게 계단 아래에 있는 작은 벽장을 내주었지요. 그곳은 햇빛이 하나도 들지 않는 곳이었어요.
그들이 말했어요.
“털북숭이 짐승아, 거기서 지내며 먹고 자거라.”
그런 다음 그녀는 부엌으로 보내졌지요. 
거기서 그녀는 땔감을 나르고 물을 깃고 난로를 청소하고 닭의 털을 뽑아야했고 야채를 다듬고 잿더미를 갈퀴로 긁고 온갖 잡일을 다해야했어요.
털북숭이 공주는 오랫동안 거기서 불쌍하게 지냈답니다.
아아, 금발의 공주님, 이제 당신은 어찌되는 겁니까!
그러다 우연히 궁전에서 큰잔치가 벌어졌지요.
그래서 그녀가 요리사에게 말했어요.
“잠시만 위로 올라가서 보고와도 될까요? 문밖에만 있다 올게요.”
요리사가 대답했어요.
“그래, 가봐라, 하지만 30분만 있다 와야 난로를 청소해놓아야 해.”
그녀가 석유램프(손전등)를 들고 자신의 초라한 굴(벽장)로 가 털북숭이 옷을 벗고 얼굴과 손에 있던 그을음(검댕. 검은 물질)을 씻어냈어요. 그랬더니 그녀의 온전한 아름다움이 다시 빛을 발하지 뭐에요.
그녀는 작은 그릇을 열어 해처럼 빛나는 황금빛 옷을 꺼냈어요.
옷을 다 입은 다음 큰잔치가 열리는 곳으로 올라갔지요.
모두가 그녀에게 길을 빗겨주었어요, 비록 그녀를 몰랐지만, 그녀가 공주님이란 사실을 믿어 의심치 않았기 때문이에요.
왕이 다가와 그녀를 맞이했어요. 그는 손을 내밀어 그녀와 함께 춤을 추었어요.
왕은 진심으로 생각했어요. 
‘살아생전 이토록 아리따운 여인을 본 적은 없노라!’
춤이 끝나자, 그녀가 서 있는 자세에서 한 쪽 다리를 뒤로 살짝 빼 무릎을 약간 구부려 인사를 했어요.
왕이 다시 돌아봤을 때 그녀는 온데간데없었어요. 그리고 아무도 그녀가 어디로 갔는지 알지 못했어요.
궁전 밖에 서 있던 보초병들을 불러 물어보았지만, 아무도 그녀를 본 이는 없었어요.
하지만 그녀는 그 시각 황급히 자신의 굴(벽장)로 뛰어가 재빨리 옷을 벗어놓고 얼굴과 손을 검게 칠한 후 털북숭이 망토를 걸치고 다시 털북숭이 공주가 되었어요.
부엌에 온 그녀가 막 잿더미를 쓸고 자신의 일을 하려는데, 요리사가 말했어요.
“아침까지 남아서 국왕폐하를 위한 수프를 끓이거라, 난 잠깐 위에 가 구경 좀 하고 올 테니. 머리카락 한 올 들어갔다가는, 먹을 걸 아무 것도 안 줄줄 알아.”
그렇게 요리사가 가자, 털북숭이 공주는 왕이 드실 수프와 ‘브래드 수프’(닭 국물)를 정성껏 만들었어요.
준비가 끝나자, 자신의 ‘굴’(계단 아래 벽장)에서 황금 반지를 가져와 그릇 밑에 넣고 수프를 담았어요.
춤이 끝나자, 왕이 수프를 가져오게 해 드셨어요.
왕은 이토록 맛있는 수프를 난생 처음 먹어봤어요.
그릇의 바닥이 보이자 곧 거기 놓인 황금 반지 하나가 눈에 들어왔어요. 왕은 도무지 그게 어떻게 거기 들어갔는지 알 길이 없었죠.
그래서 요리사를 오라고 했어요. 
대령하란 말을 듣고 요리사가 겁이나 털북숭이에게 말했어요.
“아이고, 수프에 머리카락이 들어갔나 보네, 만약 그렇다면 넌 흠뻑 얻어맞을 줄 알아.”
그가 왕 앞에 가니, 국왕께서 “누가 끓인 수프냐?”고 물었어요. 
요리사가 대답했죠.
“제가 끓었사옵니다.”
하지만 왕은 말했어요.
“그게 아닌 거 같아 묻지 않느냐. 평소보다 유난히도 맛있었단 말이다. 맛의 격이 달라.”
요리사가 대답했어요.
“황송하옵나이다. 제가 만든 게 아니라 털북숭이 동물이 만든 것이옵니다.”
왕이 말했어요.
“좀 올라오라 그래주게.” 
털북숭이 공주가 오자, 왕이 말했어요.
“너는 누구냐?”
“저는 조실부모한(어려서 부모님을 잃은) 가련한 소녀이옵니다.”
왕이 더 물었어요.
“내 궁전에선 무슨 일을 하느냐?”
그녀가 대답했어요.
“비웃음을 사지 않는 걸 그저 복으로 여기고 있어요.”
왕이 계속 물었어요.
“아니 그럼 이 수프에 든 반지는 어찌 구한 게냐?”
그녀가 대답했어요.
“반지에 관해선 저는 모르는 일이옵니다.”
더 물어도 알 거 같지 않아 왕은 그녀를 다시 돌려보내주었지요.
얼마 후 또 다른 큰잔치가 궁전에서 있었어요.
그러자 앞서와 같이 털북숭이 공주가 요리사에게 잠시만 가서 구경하고 오겠다고 간청했어요.
그가 대답했어요.
“그래, 하지만 30분 만에 돌아와, 국왕폐하께서 엄청 좋아하시는 ‘브래드 수프’(닭 국물)을 만들어야한다.”
그러자 그녀가 냉큼 자신의 초라한 굴(벽장)로 가 재빨리 씻고 작은 그릇에서 달처럼 빛나는 은빛 옷을 꺼내 입었어요.
그런 다음 그녀가 계단을 밟고 올라갔어요. 그녀는 마치 공주님 같았답니다. 왕이 앞으로 걸어와 그녀를 맞이했어요. 왕은 그녀를 다시 본 게 너무도 반가웠어요. 춤이 시작되자 그들은 함께 아름다운 춤을 추었답니다.
하지만 춤을 끝마쳤을 때, 그녀가 또다시 재빨리 사라지는 바람에 왕은 그녀가 어느 방향으로 가는지도 알지 못했어요.
하지만 그녀는 그 시각 자신의 초라한 굴(계단 아래의 벽장)로 뛰어들어 다시 한 번 털북숭이로 변신해 부엌으로 가 ‘브래드 수프’(닭국물)를 만들었어요.
요리사가 위층으로 가자, 그녀는 자신의 황금 ‘물레’(실을 잣는 재래식 기구. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/nRjxOi )를 가져와 그릇에 넣곤 수프를 그 위에 부었답니다.
요리를 받은 왕은 맛있게 먹었어요.
그리고 앞서와 같이 무척 그것을 좋아하셨답니다.
그래서 요리사를 불렀어요.
이번에도 “누가 요리했느냐?”라며 자백을 강요당하자, 요리사는 털북숭이가 만든 수프라고 자백해야했답니다.
왕 앞에 다시 불려나온 털북숭이는 “비웃음을 사지 않는 걸 그저 복으로 여기고 있사옵니다. 그리고 황금 물레에 관해선 저는 전혀 모르는 일이옵니다.”라고 대답했어요.
세 번째로, 왕이 큰잔치를 열었을 때도 앞서와 같은 일이 똑같이 반복되었지요.
요리사가 말했어요.
“이게 대체 어떻게 된 거야, 털북숭이 너 맹세코 마녀지, 어떻게 네가 수프만 만들었다 하면 왕이 저리도 좋아하시느냔 말이다.”
하지만 그녀는 거듭 거듭 “올라가 잠시 구경만 하다 올게요.”라며 간절히 간청했어요. 
그리고 돌아와선, 요리사가 정해진 시각에 올라가게 두고선 자신은 재빨리 초라한 굴(벽장)로 가 이번엔 별처럼 빛나는 별빛 옷을 차려입고 ‘홀’(넓은 공간)로 들어섰지요.
왕은 다시 한 번 이 아리따운 처녀와 춤을 추었답니다. 
왕은 생각했어요.
‘이토록 아름다운 여인은 없었도다.’ 
그녀와 춤을 추는 동안, 그녀가 눈치 채지 못하게, 왕이 용케도 그녀의 손가락에 황금반지를 끼우는데 성공했어요. 왕은 또한 춤 연주를 아주 길게 하도록 지시를 내린 상태였지요.
춤이 끝나자, 왕이 그녀의 손을 꼭 붙들고 있으려 했어나, 그녀가 손을 빼고 군중 속으로 달아나버리는 바람에 시야에서 놓치고 말았지요.
그녀는 황급히 계단 아래에 있는 자신의 굴(벽장)로 달려갔어요. 하지만 춤을 추다 30분을 넘기는 바람에 예쁜 달빛 옷을 벗을 시간이 없어, 그냥 털북숭이 망토를 달빛 옷 위에 걸치고 서둘러 그을음(검댕)을 얼굴과 손에 칠한다는 게 그만, 손가락 하나가 여전히 새하얀 채로 남게 되었지요. 
털북숭이가 부엌으로 달려가 왕이 드실 ‘브래드 수프’(닭국물)를 요리했어요.
요리사가 위층으로 가자, 그녀는 황금 ‘얼레’(실 감는 거. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/g3XZOf )를 그릇 안에 담았어요.
왕이 그릇 바닥에서 그 얼레를 발견했어요.
왕이 털북숭이를 부르라고 지시했어요.
그때 문득 춤추는 동안 왕 자신이 공주에게 끼운 반지를 그녀의 새하얀 손가락에서 보게 되었어요.
순간 왕이 그녀의 손을 붙잡더니 꼭 쥐었어요.
그녀가 손을 풀고 달아나려 했을 때, 살짝 열린 털북숭이 망토 사이로, 그녀가 입은 별처럼 빛나는 별빛 옷이 반짝반짝 엿보였어요.
왕이 그 망토를 부어 잡더니 확 벗겨버렸어요.
순간 그녀의 황금처럼 빛나는 머릿결이 빛을 발하며, 그녀가 온전히 아름다운 모습 그대로 서 있는 거예요. 너무도 환해 도저히 더는 자신을 숨길 곳이 없었죠. 
그녀가 얼굴에 묻은 그을음(검댕)과 재(잿더미)를 씻어내자, 그녀는 이 세상 어느 누구보다 훨씬 더 아름다웠어요.
왕이 말했어요.
“내 사랑하는 신부가 되어주오, 우리 더는 서로 떨어지지 맙시다.” 
그 후 즉시 결혼식이 성대하게 거행되었어요.
그들은 죽을 때까지 행복하게 살았답니다.

(동화 끝)

동화 「털북숭이 공주」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「털북숭이 공주」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter65.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



66. 토끼의 신부



옛날 옛적에 양배추가 자라는 예쁜 정원을 둔 엄마와 딸이 살고 있었어요.
그런데 겨울에 작은 산토끼가 오더니 양배추를 야금야금 먹었어요.
그러자 엄마가 딸내미에게 말했지요.
“정원에 나가서, 산토끼를 쫓아내거라.”
소녀가 작은 산토끼에게 말했어요.
“쉿-쉿, 산토끼, 너 정말 우리 집 양배추 다 먹어치울 거니.”
산토끼가 말했어요.
“이리와요, 아가씨, 내 귀여운 꼬리에 앉아 나랑 같이 우리 예쁜 산토끼 오두막으로 가요.”
소녀는 그럴 뜻이 전혀 없었어요.
다음날 그 산토끼가 또 와서 양배추들을 야금야금 먹었어요.
그러자 엄마가 딸내미에게 말했어요.
“정원에 나가서, 산토끼를 몰아내거라.”
소녀가 산토끼에게 말했어요.
“쉿-쉿, 작은 산토끼야, 너 정말 우리 집 양배추 다 먹어치울 테야.”
작은 산토끼가 말했어요.
“아가씨, 내 귀여운 꼬리에 앉아요, 우리 같이 예쁜 산토끼 오두막으로 가요.”
처녀가 거절했지요.
세 번째 날 그 산토끼가 또 와서 양배추들을 야금야금 먹었어요.
그러자 엄마가 딸내미에게 말했어요.
“정원에 나가서, 산토끼를 내몰 거라.”
처녀가 말했어요.
“쉿-쉿, 작은 산토끼야, 너 정말 우리 집 양배추를 다 먹어치울 거니.”
작은 산토끼가 말했어요.
“어서요, 아가씨, 제 꼬리 위에 앉아요, 우리 같이 제 예쁘장한 산토끼 오두막으로 가요.”
소녀가 작은 산토끼의 꼬리 위에 앉았어요. 
그런 다음 산토끼가 그녀를 태우고 멀리 떨어진 자신의 예쁜 오두막으로 가서 말했어요.
“자 초록색 양배추와 ‘기장 종자’(기장=잡곡밥. 종자=씨앗. 기장 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/bFDQa1 )로 음식을 만드세요, 저는 결혼식 하객(손님)들을 초대할 테니까요.”
그래서 결혼식 하객들이 모두 모였어요.
누구였게요?
제가 들은 대로 여러분들께 말씀해드릴게요.
네, 맞아요, 산토끼들은 모두 왔어요. 그리고 신랑과 신부를 결혼시키는 목사님은 까마귀였고요, 집사(교회의 집사)님은 여우였어요. 그리고 결혼식 제단(=탁자) 위로 무지개가 피어있었답니다.
하지만 소녀는 슬펐어요. 왜냐면 신부 측 하객(손님)은 그녀 혼자였으니까요.
작은 산토끼가 오더니 말했어요.
“문들을 열어요, 문들을 열어, 결혼식 하객들이 흥겨워하니까요.”
신부는 아무 말도 못하고 울기만 했어요.
작은 산토끼가 갔어요.
작은 산토끼는 다시 돌아와 말했어요.
“음식을 내요(원문→뚜껑을 벗겨요), 음식을 내, 결혼식 하객들이 배고파하니까요.”
신부는 또다시 아무 말도 못하고 울었어요.
작은 산토끼가 갔어요.
작은 산토끼가 다시 돌아와 말했어요.
“음식을 내요(원문→뚜껑을 벗겨요), 음식을 내, 결혼식 하객들이 기다리고 있단 말이에요.”  
신부가 아무 말도 안 하자, 산토끼가 갔어요.
하지만 그녀는 밀짚으로 된 인형에 자신의 옷을 입히곤 국을 저으라며 스푼(숟가락)을 하나 쥐어주고 ‘기장(=잡곡밥) 종자(=씨앗)’가 든 냄비 옆에 인형을 세워놓곤 자신은 그냥 엄마에게 가버렸어요.
작은 산토끼가 한 번 더 와서 말했어요.
“음식을 내요(원문→뚜껑을 벗겨요), 음식을 그만 내라고요.”
 그가 다리를 들고 일어서 인형의 머리를 때렸어요. 그 바람에 인형의 모자가 “툭!”하고 인형 ‘모자’(뚜껑이란 의미도 있음)가 바닥에 떨어졌어요.  
그제야 작은 산토끼는 그 인형이 자신의 신부가 아니란 걸 깨닫곤 너무 슬픈 나머지 집을 나가 어디로 가버렸답니다.

(동화 끝)

동화 「토끼의 신부」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「토끼의 신부」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter66.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



67. 열두 사냥꾼



옛날에 정말 사랑하는 아가씨(공주님임)와 약혼을 한 왕자님이 있었어요.
그는 그녀 곁에 앉아 더없이 행복에 겨워 있었죠. 그때 그의 아빠인 왕이 생사를 넘나들고 계시다는 비보가 전해져, 죽기 전에 아들을 간절히 다시 만나고 싶어 한다는 전갈(소식)이 왔어요.
그래서 왕자가 자신의 약혼녀에게 말했어요.
“아무래도 가봐야 될 거 같소. 당신을 두고 가는 게 마음에 들리는 구려. 내 사랑의 징표로 이 반지를 당신께 주겠소. 내가 왕이 되면, 다시 돌아와 당신을 데려가리다.”
그렇게 왕자는 말을 타고 가버렸어요.
왕자가 도착해보니, 왕은 정말 위독하셨어요. 죽음이 가까웠죠.
왕이 왕자에게 말했어요.
“사랑하는 아들아, 죽기 전에 너를 다시 보고 싶었다, 내가 원하는 여인이랑 결혼해주겠노라 약속해다오.”
왕이 어떤 공주의 이름을 호명하며 그녀가 왕자의 아내가 되면 좋겠다고 말하셨어요.
왕자는 워낙 경황이 없던 지라 자신이 무슨 말을 하는지도 모르고 이렇게 말했어요.
“네, 아바마마, 당신 뜻대로 따르겠나이다.”
그 후 곧 왕께서 두 눈을 감으시고 돌아가셨어요.
그 결과로써 아들이 왕으로 선포되었어요.
애도 기간이 지나자, 왕은 이제 정말 아빠가 정해준 공주와 결혼해야 될 판이었어요. 그래서 사람을 보내 그 공주님께 청혼했고, 그녀도 그 청혼을 받아들였어요.
이 소식을 전해들은, 그의 첫 번째 약혼녀(공주)는 그의 변절(신의 없음)에 너무도 괴로워 정말 죽다 살아났어요.
그래서 그녀의 아빠(왕)가 그녀에게 말했어요.
“사랑하는 얘야, 무엇이 그리 슬프니? 네가 원하는 건 뭐든 말만 하거라.”
그녀가 잠시 동안 생각하더니 말했어요.
“아빠, 저랑 얼굴이며 몸매며 키가 똑같은 여인 11명만 구해주세요.”
아빠(왕)가 말했어요.
“가능하면, 네 소원이 이뤄지도록 하겠다.”
그는 전국방방곳곳으로 사람을 보내 자신의 딸과 얼굴이며 몸매며 키가 정확히 닮은 11명의 젊은 처자들을 모집했어요.
그녀들이 공주에게 도착하자, 공주는 사냥꾼 복장 12벌을 준비해, 11명의 처자들에게 입히고 자신은 12번 째 사냥꾼 복장을 착용했어요.
그 후 즉시 그녀는 아빠에게 작별인사를 하고 그녀들과 말을 타고 떠나 전 약혼자가 있는 궁전으로 갔어요. 왜냐면 그녀는 아직도 그를 너무도 사랑했기 때문이지요.
그런 다음 그녀는 왕에게 사냥꾼이 필요하지 않으시냐고 물고는 자기들 전부를 그의 사냥꾼으로 채용해 달라 청했어요.
왕은 그녀를 보고도 전혀 알아보지 못했어요. 
그들이 정말 잘생긴 친구들이었기에 왕이 말했어요.
“좋소.”
왕은 기꺼이 그들을 채용했고, 그들은 이제 왕의 열두 사냥꾼으로 불리게 되었어요.
하지만 왕에겐 숨겨진 비밀이란 비밀은 죄다 알아맞힐 수 있는 신비로운 동물인 ‘사자’(어흥 하고 우는 동물)가 한 마리 있었어요.
그러던 어느 날 저녁 사자(동물)가 왕에게 말했어요.
“당신의 열두 사냥꾼들을 어찌 생각하나요?”
“응,”라며 왕이 말했어요. “열두 남성사냥꾼들 말이니.”
사자(동물)가 계속 말을 이어갔어요.
“잘못 알고 계세요, 그들은 열두 여인들이에요.”
왕이 말했다. 
“그럴 리 없어! 그걸 어찌 입증하겠다는 거니?”
“오, 그대의 대기실에 상당한 양의 완두콩들을 흩뿌려놓아 보시기만 하면 돼지요.”라며 그 사자(동물)가 대답했어요. “그럼 당장에 알 수 있을 겁니다. 그들이 남자들이라면 단호하게 걷을 테니 그 완두콩들을 함부로 밟고 지나가려들 테니 완두콩 하나도 까딱하지 않을 거지만, 그들이 여인들이라면 가볍게 까불며 발을 질질 끌어당기며 걸을 것이기에 완두콩들이 사방으로 데굴데굴 굴러다닐 겁니다.” 
왕은 그 제안이 마음에 들었기에 사람을 시켜 완두콩들을 흩뿌려놓게 했어요.
그렇지만, 그 사냥꾼들과 친하게 지내던 시종(원문→왕의 관리)이 한 명 있었는데, 그가 이 시험 얘기를 듣곤 그들에게 가 모두 되풀이해 말했어요.
“사자(동물)가, 당신들이 여자라고 왕이 믿게 만들고 싶어 해.”
그래서 공주는 그에게 고맙다고 말한 다음 자신의 아가씨들을 불러 말했어요.
“힘차게 걷고 완두콩 위를 단단히 밟고 지나가라.”
다음날 왕이 열두 사냥꾼을 불렀어요.
그들이 대기실에 들어왔지요. 거기에 완두콩이 놓여 있었지요. 그들이 그 위를 단단히 밟고 지나갔어요. 그런 씩씩한 걸음에 완두콩 어느 것 하나도 데굴데굴 굴러가지 않았어요.  
그들을 다시 보내고 나서, 왕이 사자(동물)에게 말했어요.
“내게 거짓말을 했구나, 남자처럼 걷지 않더냐.”
사자(동물)가 말했어요.
“그들은 자신들이 시험에 들 거라 알았기 때문에 그렇게 힘차게 걸은 게 당연하다 생각됩니다. 그럼 이번엔 열두 ‘물레’(실을 잣는 재래식 기구. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/nRjxOi )를 대기실에 가져다 놓아 보십시오. 그럼 그들은 그것을 보고 무척이나 마음에 들어할 것입니다. 남자라면 절대 그럴 리 없지요.”
왕이 그 조언이 좋았어요. 그래서 사람을 시켜 대기실에 물레를 갖다놓게 했어요.
하지만, 그 사냥꾼들에게 호의적이었던 ‘시종’(원문→왕의 관리)은 이번에도 그들에게 가 계획을 폭로했지요.
그들만 남자 공주님이 열두 여인들에게 말했어요.
“몸단속들 단단히 하거라, 물레에는 절대 눈길도 주어선 안 된다.”
다음날 아침에 왕이 열두 사냥꾼들을 불렀어요. 그들이 대기실에 들어왔죠. 하지만 어느 누구도 그 물레들을 쳐다보지 않았답니다.
그리하여 왕이 다시 ‘사자’(동물)에게 말했어요.
“아니지 않느냐, 네가 나를 속이다니, 그들은 정녕 남자들이다. 왜냐면 물레엔 눈길도 한 번 안 주었기 때문이다.”
사자(동물)가 대꾸했어요.
“테스트가 있을 걸 알았기 때문입니다. 그들을 구속하십시오.”
하지만 왕은 더 이상 사자(동물) 말에 귀 기울이지 않았어요. 
열두 사냥꾼들은 항상 왕을 따라 사냥에 나갔어요.
왕도 그들을 점점 더 좋아하게 되었지요.
그러던 어느 날 그들이 밖에서 사냥을 하고 있을 때, 왕의 약혼녀가 오고 있다는 소식이 전해졌어요.
그때 그 소식을 들은 진짜 신부가 너무도 마음에 상처를 입은 나머지 심장이 거의 산산조각 나 땅바닥에 풀썩 쓰러지고 말았어요.
왕은 자신이 애지중지하는 사냥꾼에게 뭔 일이 벌어진 거라 생각하고는 급히 달려와 숨을 편히 쉬게 해주려고 그의 장갑을 벗겼어요. 
순간 왕이 자신의 첫 번째 신부에게 줬던 반지가 눈에 들어왔어요.
그제야 그녀의 얼굴을 다시 쳐다본 왕이 그녀를 알아봤어요.
너무도 감동한 나머지 그가 그녀에게 키스를 하자, 그녀가 두 눈을 떴지요.
그가 말했어요.
“당신은 나의 것이고, 나는 이제 당신 것이오. 이 세상 어느 누구도 우리 사랑을 바꿀 수 없소.”
그가 다른 신부에게 ‘사자’(왕의 심부름꾼)을 보내 그녀 자신의 왕국으로 되돌아가 줄 것을 간절히 청했어요. 
왜냐면 그(왕)는 이미 아내가 얻었으니까요, 
예전 접시를 막 발견한 사람은 새 접시를 달라하지 않는 법이니까요.
그 후 즉시 결혼식이 성대하게 거행되었어요.
그리고 ‘사자’(동물)도 다시 왕의 총애를 받게 되었답니다.
결국 그(사자)가 말한 게 다 사실이었으니까요.

(동화 끝)

동화 「열두 사냥꾼」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「열두 사냥꾼」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter67.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



68. 도둑과 도둑 선생



‘한스’(독일사람이란 뜻임. 영어이름 ‘존’이 독일어이름으로는 ‘한스’임)는 자기 아들에게 어떤 ‘일’(기술을 요하는 손으로 하는 일)을 배우게 할지 알고 싶어 교회로 가 우리 주 하느님께 기도를 올렸어요.
“하느님, 어느 직업이 이 애에게 장래성이 있겠나이까?”
그때 교회 집사님이 ‘제단’(교회 탁자) 뒤를 보시다 말고 소리쳤어요.
“도둑이야, 도둑.”
그러고 나서 한스는 아들에게 돌아와 “네게 도둑질을 가르치겠다. 주 하느님께서 그리하라 이르셨느니라.”라고 말해주었어요.
그래서 그는 아들을 데리고 도둑질에 정통한 자를 찾아 나섰어요.
그들이 한참을 걷자 울창한 숲이 하나 나왔어요.
그 숲에 작은 집이 한 채 서 있는데, 노파가 안에 살고 있었어요.
한스가 말했어요.
“도둑질 정말 잘하는 자를 아시는 지요?”
“그거라면 여기서도 기가 막히도록 배울 수 있지.”라며 그 여자가 말했어요. “왜냐면 내 아들 놈이 그쪽 방면으론 도사거든.”
그리하여 한스는 그 아드님(도둑)과 얘기를 나누게 되었어요.
한스가 물어봤어요.
“정말 도둑질에 정통하십니까?”
도둑 선생이 말했어요.
“내가 그 애를 잘 가르쳐드리리다. 1년 후 와 보시고, 아들을 알아챌 수 있다면 내 수업료는 받지 않으리다. 하지만 그를 못 알아볼 경우 당신은 내게 은화 2백 개를 줘야하오.”
아빠는 다시 집으로 갔어요.
그리고 아들은 마법과 도둑질을 철두철미하게 배웠지요.
1년이 끝나자, 아빠가 근심을 가득 안고 과연 자신이 아들을 알아볼 수 있을지 어떨지 몰라 하며 길을 나섰어요.
골머리를 잔득 안고 가는데, 불쑥 작은 난쟁이 한 명가 마주쳤지요.
난쟁이가 말했어요.
“이런, 어디 아프신 건가요, 안색이 영 아니세요?”
“아아,”라며 한스가 말했어요. “1년 전에 아들놈을 도둑 선생에게 맡기고 왔는데, 그가 말하길 내가 1년 후 돌아왔을 때 아들놈을 못 알아보면 수업료로 은화 2백 개를 줘야한다 그랬지. 그런데 난 줄 돈이 한 푼도 없는 걸, 만약에 지금 가서 아들을 못 알아보면 어쩌나 겁도 나고 또 그 돈을 어디서 구하나 알 길이 없어 그래.”
그러자 그 난쟁이가 그에게 “작은 빵바구니를 들고 굴뚝 아래로 가 서 있으면 돼요.”라고 말해주었어요.
“대들보(지붕을 떠받치기 위해, 기둥 사이에 놓음. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/NrIY2X ) 위에 바구니가 하나 있을 거예요, 그 바구니 안에서 작은 새 한 마리가 밖을 엿보고 있을 텐데, 그게 바로 당신 아드님이랍니다.” 
한스가 거기로 가, 검은 빵이 가득 든 작은 바구니 하나를 그 새가 들어 있는 바구니 앞에 던져주었더니, 작은 새가 밖으로 나와 고개를 들며 쳐다봤어요.
“안녕, 내 아들아, 너 여기 있었니?”라며 아빠가 말하자, 아들은 아빠를 다시 본 게 너무도 기뻤어요.
하지만 도둑 선생이 말했지요.
“사탄이 가르쳐준 게 분명하다. 그렇지 않음 어찌 당신이 아들을 알아볼 수 있느냔 말이다?”
“아빠, 우리 얼른 가요.”라며 젊은이가 말했어요.
그래서 아빠와 아들은 집으로 출발을 하였답니다.
가는 도중 마차 한 대가 옆을 지나가려하고 있었어요.
그러자 아들이 아빠에게 말했어요.
“제가 큰 ‘그레이하운드’(사냥개. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/VRTJX8 )로 변할 테니 그럼 아빠가 저로 인해 큰돈을 버실 수 있을 거예요.”
그때 마차에 탄 신사분이 부르더니 말했어요.
“이봐, 자네 개 파실 텐가?”
“네.”라고 아빠가 말했어요.
“얼마를 주면 되겠나?”
“은화 30개요.”
“어이, 이봐, 너무 많이 부르는군, 하지만 그만큼은 할 좋은 개로 보이니 내 그 돈을 줌세.”
신사가 개를 마차에 태우고 갔어요.
그들이 마차를 몰고 좀 갔을 때, 그 개가 창문을 넘어 마차 밖으로 뛰어내리더니 아빠한테도 돌아가 버렸어요. 물론 그땐 그는 더 이상 그레이하운드(사냥개)가 아니었지요.
그들은 함께 집으로 돌아왔답니다.
다음날 이웃 마을에서 장(=시장)이 열렸어요.
그래서 젊은이가 아빠에게 말했어요.
“제가 이번엔 아름다운 말로 변할 테니, 아빠는 저를 파세요, 단 파시고 나면 반드시 제 ‘고삐’(말의 재갈에 잡아매는 줄. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/JU7P2Y )를 벗겨주셔야해요. 그렇지 않음 제가 다시 사람으로 돌아올 수 없어요.”
그런 다음 아빠는 말을 데리고 장(시장)으로 갔어요.
때마침 도둑 선생이 오더니 말을 은화 백 개를 주고 샀어요.
하지만 아빠는 깜빡 까먹고서 고삐를 벗겨주지 않았어요.
도둑 선생은 그 말을 데리고 집으로 와 마구간에 넣어두었어요.
하녀가 집에 들어오는 것을 본 그 말이 말했어요.
“제 고삐(=줄) 좀 벗겨주세요, 제 고삐 좀 벗겨주세요.”
순간 하녀가 멈춰 섰다 말했어요.
“어마나, 너 말도 할 줄 아는구나?”
그래서 그녀가 다가와 고삐를 벗겨주었어요. 
그러자 그 말이 참새로 변하더니 문 밖으로 날아가 버렸어요.  
그리고 마법사(도둑선생) 또한 참새로 변하더니 그를 뒤쫓아 날아갔어요.
그런 다음 그들은 하나가 되어 ‘주먹질을 해댔어요’(원문→제비뽑기를 했어요).
하지만 도둑 선생이 져서 강물에 떨어지고 말았어요. 그가 곧 물고기로 변했어요. 
그러자 젊은이 또한 물고기로 변해 강물 속에 뛰어들었고, 그들의 싸움이 다시 시작되었지요. 이번에도 도둑 선생이 지고 말았어요.
그래서 도둑 선생은 수탉으로 변신을 하였답니다. 하지만 젊은이는 여우로 변하더니 도둑 선생의 머리를 물어 뜯어버렸어요.
그 바람에 도둑 선생은 죽고 말았지요. 지금까지도 그(도둑 선생)는 죽은 채 그 자리에 누워있답니다.

(동화 끝)

동화 「도둑과 도둑 선생」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「도둑과 도둑 선생」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter68.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



69. 요린데와 요링겔



옛날 옛적에 울창하고 깊은 숲 한 가운데에 오래된 성이 하나 있었어요.
거기엔 마녀인 노파가 홀로 살고 있었어요.
그녀는 낮엔 고양이나 날카로운 소리로 우는 올빼미로 변하고, 저녁엔 다시 온전한 사람의 모습으로 돌아왔어요.
그녀는 가짜 미끼로 야생짐승이나 새들을 유혹해 죽인 다음 끓이나 구웠어요.
게다가 누구든 성에서 백 걸음 내에 들어오게 되면 꼼짝달싹 못해버리고 말았죠. 적어도 마녀가 풀어주기 전까진 말이에요.
만약 순결한 처녀가 이 원(백 걸음 안) 안에 들어오게 되면 새로 변해버리고 ‘고리버들 세공 새장’(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/tBlBOr ) 안에 갇혀 성 안에 있는 어떤 방으로 옮겨졌답니다.
마녀의 성에는 그런 진기한 새들이 담긴 새장이 약 7천 개를 있었지요. 
바야흐로 ‘요린데’라고 불리는 처녀가 있었는데 그 어떤 여인네들보다 더 아름다운 처녀였어요.
그녀에게는 ‘요링겔’이라고 불리고, 서로 결혼을 약속한 잘생긴 젊은이가 한 명 있었지요.
아직 약혼 기간이라 그들은 서로 함께 있는 게 더없이 행복했답니다.
하루는 그들이 조용히 함께 대화를 나누기 위해 숲으로 산책을 나갔어요.
“조심해,”라며 요링겔(남자)이 말했어요. “성에 너무 가까이 가면 안 돼.”
무척이나 아름다운 저녁이었지요.
숲에 짙게 드리운 초록의 나무줄기들 사이로 햇살이 화사하게 비치고, ‘자작나무’(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/6l19To )의 어린 가지들 위로 ‘멧비둘기’(야생비둘기이름. 암수가 사이좋기로 유명함. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/MbpGCx )들이 구슬프게 노래를 부르고 있는 그런 저녁이었지요.
요린데(여자)가 이따금씩 울었어요. 양지(햇볕)에 앉았더니 슬퍼져서요.
요링겔(남자)도 마찬가지로 구슬퍼졌지요.
그들은 마치 자신들이 죽기라고 할 거 마냥 슬펐어요.
그때 그들이 주변을 돌아보고서야 길을 잃었다는 사실을 인지했어요. 어느 방향으로 가야 집으로 갈 수 있을지를 알 수 없었거든요.
해는 이미 저물어 반은 산에 걸려 있고 반은 산 아래로 잠긴 상태였어요.
요링겔(남자)이 수풀 사이를 살피다 오래된 성 벽들을 보고서 자신들이 지금 그 성에 너무 가까이 와 있음을 알게 되었어요.
그는 공포에 질려 극도로 겁을 집어먹고 말았어요.
요린데(여자)는 여전히 앉아서…
“작은 새야, 빨간 목걸이를 지닌 작은 새가, 구슬, 구슬, 구슬프게도 노래를 하네, 사랑하는 그대가 곧 죽을 걸 노래하시나요, 구슬프게, 구슬프… 짹, 짹, 짹, 노래하네.”
요링겔(남자)이 요린데(여자)를 바라보니 그녀는 이미 한 마리 ‘나이팅게일’(새이름. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/w6Qp36 )로 변해 노래를 부르고 있었어요. 
“짹, 짹, 짹,” (나이팅게일 울음소리 ? 유튜브 링크 ▶ https://youtu.be/NK2_bcQcoD4 )
날카로운 소리로 우는 올빼미 한 마리가 새빨갛게 달아 오른 눈을 하고서 날아와 그녀 주변을 세 바퀴 돌며 날카로운 소리로 외쳤어요. 
“부우우엉, 부우우엉, 부우우엉!” (←올빼미 울음소리 “부엉, 부엉, 부엉!” / 올빼미 소리링크 ? 두산백과 ▶ https://goo.gl/3bwGpc . 화면 중간 ‘소리 듣기’ 클릭하면 됨)
요링겔(남자)은 움직일 수 없어 그 자리에 돌처럼 서 있었어요. 그는 울 수도 그렇다고 말할 수도 없었고 손도 발도 움직일 수 없었답니다.
이제 해가 저물었어요.
그 올빼미가 수풀 속으로 내려앉았어요. 곧이어 거기서 늙어 허리가 꼬부라지고 살갗이 누런 노파가 한 명 나왔어요. 크고 붉은 눈에 매부리코를 한 노파였지요. 어찌나 매부리코든지 코끝이 턱에 가 닿을 정도였어요. 
그녀가 혼자 뭐라 읊조리더니 나이팅게일을 잡아 손에 쥐더니 가버렸어요.
요링겔(남자)이 한 마디도 못하고, 한 발자국도 움직일 수 없는데, 나이팅게일은 사라졌어요.
마침내 그 여인이 돌아오더니 불성실한 말투로 말했어요.
“너에게 인사해라, 자키엘, 달이 새장에 비치면, 자키엘, 그를 즉시 풀어 주거라.”
그러자 요링겔(나자)이 풀려났어요.
그가 그 여인 앞에 무릎을 꿇고 앉아 약혼녀 요린데(여자)를 돌려 달라 빌고 또 빌었어요. 
하지만 그녀는 “그녀를 다시 볼 수 없을 게다.”라고만 말하곤 가버렸어요.
그는 부르고 울고 하소연을 해보았지만, 모두 허사였어요.
“아, 나는 이제 어찌 사나?”
요링겔(남자)이 떠났어요.
그는 마침내 낯선 마을에 도착해 거기서 오랫동안 양치기로 지냈어요.
그는 종종 그 성을 돌고 돌았어요. 하지만 너무 가까이는 가지 않았지요.
마침내 그가 어느 날 밤, 피처럼 붉은 꽃을 한 송이 발견하는 꿈을 꾸었어요. 그 꽃 중앙엔 아름답고 큰 진주가 하나 박혀 있었지요. 그가 꿈에서 그 꽃을 꺾어 성으로 가니 꽃에 닿는 모든 것이 마법에서 풀려났어요. 그는 또한 그 꽃으로 자신의 약혼녀 요린데(여자)를 구하는 꿈까지 꾸었답니다. 
아침에, 잠에서 깨어난 그가 정말로 그런 꽃이 있는지 온 언덕을 뒤지기 시작했어요.
그러던 아홉째(9) 날 아침 일찍 그가 피처럼 붉은 그 꽃을 찾아냈어요. 정말 그 꽃 중앙엔 큰 이슬방울이 한 방울 달려 있는데, 마치 정교한 진주만큼이나 성장해 있었어요.
밤낮으로 그가 이 꽃을 쥐고 여행을 해 기어이 그 성에 도착했어요.
그가 그 성에서 백 발자국 안에 들어갔는데도 몸이 굳어지지 않았어요. 
그래서 뛸 듯이 기뻐하며 성문까지 나아갔어요.
그가 그 꽃으로 성문을 건드리니 물이 활짝 열렸어요.
그는 안마당으로 걸어 들어가 새 소리가 들리는지 귀를 기울여보았어요.
마침내 새 소리가 들렸어요.
그가 계단을 밟고 올라가 그 새 소리가 나올 법한 방을 찾았어요.
그 방에서 마녀가 7천개나 되는 새장에 갇힌 새들에게 모이를 주고 있었어요.
마녀는 요링겔(남자)을 보자 화가 나고, 또 몹시 화가나 호통치고 독을 뿌리며 그를 위협했어요. 
하지만 그녀는 그의 두 발자국 내로는 다가올 수가 없었어요.
그는 마녀는 무시하고서, 새들이 갇힌 새장으로 가 살펴보기 시작했어요.
이 수백 마리 나이팅게일(새이름)들 속에서 어떻게 자신의 약혼녀 요린데를 찾을 수 있을까요?
때마침 한 마리 새가 든 새장 하나를 노파가 들고서 급히 자리를 뜨려는 게 그의 눈에 들어왔어요.
마녀는 문으로 향하고 있었어요.
그가 신속히 그녀에게로 튀어가 꽃으로 새장을 치고 마녀 또한 쳤어요.
그녀는 이제 더 이상 다른 이에게 마법을 걸 수가 없었어요.
그리고 요린데(여자)가 거기 서 있었어요. 그녀가 달려와 그의 목을 감싸 안았어요. 그런 그녀의 모습은 그 어느 때보다도 아름다웠답니다!

(동화 끝)

동화 「요린데와 요링겔」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「요린데와 요링겔」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter69.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



70. 세 행운아 (삼 형제의 행운)



아빠가 한 번은 세 아들을 자기 앞으로 불러, 첫째에게는 수탉 한 마리를, 둘째에게는 큰 낫 한 자루를, 그리고 막내에게는 고양이 한 마리를 주었어요.
“난 이제 나이도 있고,”라며 그가 말했어요. “갈 날도 멀지 않았구나. 눈을 감기 전 너희들에게 줄 걸 생각해봤는데, 가진 돈이 있어야 말이지, 하지만 모든 것은 너희들이 그걸 현명하게 사용하는 데에 달려 있다. 그런 것이 진기한 곳을 찾는다면 누가 아니 큰 행운이 생길지.”
아빠가 돌아가시고, 첫째는 수탉을 들고 길을 나섰어요.
하지만 그가 어딜 가든 수탉은 이미 있었어요. 아무리 먼 도시에서도 그것은 뾰족탑 위에 앉아 바람에 따라 빙빙 돌아가고 있었고요, 아무리 먼 마을에서도 “꼬끼오” 소리를 들렸어요. 누구도 수탉을 보고 의아해하지 않았기에, 첫째가 이걸로 한 몫 잡을 리는 전혀 없어 보였지요.
하지만, 마침내, 그는 우연히도 수탉을 전혀 모르는 사람들이 사는 섬에 들어가게 되었어요. 그곳 사람들은 심지어 시간을 나눌 줄도 몰랐어요. 아침과 저녁은 알았지만, 밤에 자기 않을 때는 그게 몇 시인지 그들은 몰랐어요.
“보시오!”라고 첫째가 말했어요. “이 얼마나 당당한 생물이오! 머리에 루비 빛깔 왕관을 쓰고 ‘기사’(말을 타고 싸우는 기병)처럼 ‘박차’(말을 탈 때 신발에 착용하는 톱니바퀴 모양의 쇠)를 하고 있지 않소. 이 생물은 여러분들에게 밤 동안 정해진 시각에 세 번 울어줍니다. 그 마지막 한 번은 해가 곧 뜨려할 때 울어주지요. 하지만 이 생물이 대낮에도 ‘꼬끼오’거린다면 그럼 주목하셔야합니다. 왜냐면 날씨 변화가 확실하기 때문입니다.”
사람들이 크게 기뻐했어요. 그들이 깨어 있는 밤 동안 수탉이 새벽2시, 새벽 4시, 그리고 아침6시에 크고 맑은 목청으로 울며 시간을 알려주니 이보다 더 기쁠 수가 없었죠.
그들이 “만약 그 생물을 파실 생각이면, 얼마에 파실 거요?”라고 물었어요.
“당나귀가 옮길 수 있는 금화 가득이요.”라고 첫째가 대답했어요.
“이런 값진 생물에게 그런 터무니없이 적은 금액을 부르시다니!”라며 그들이 만장일치로 소리치더니, 기꺼이 첫째가 요구한 금액을 내주었답니다. 
첫째가 부자가 되어 집에 돌아오자, 형제들은 뒤로 까무러칠 지경이었어요.
그래서 둘째가 말했어요.
“얼씨구, 그럼 나도 나가서 내 큰 낫이 진기한 곳을 찾아 한 밑천 챙기고 와야지.”
하지만 그런 곳은 눈을 씻고 봐도 없었지요. 둘째가 부지런히 방방곳곳을 돌아다녀보았지만, 사람들은 다 어깨 위에 둘째가 가진 것과 같은 큰 낫들을 지니고 있는 걸요.
하지만 마침내 둘째도 우연히 어느 섬을 하나 발견하게 되었는데, 그 섬 사람들은 큰 낫이 뭔지 전혀 몰랐어요.
거기선 곡식이 익으면, 대포를 들판으로 가져와 쏘며 곡식을 쓰러뜨려 거두었지요.
하지만 이런 방식으로 제대로 될 리가 없었죠. 왜냐면 대포를 쏘는 족족 들판 너머로 곧장 날아가거나, 줄기 대신 멀쩡한 이삭을 맞춰버려 쑥대밭으로 만드니, 곡식 거두려다 태반을 잃고 말았지요. 게다가 끔찍한 대포 소린 또 어쩌구요.
그리하여 둘째가 작업에 착수해 아주 조용하면서도 재빠르게 곡식을 베어넘기자, 그 섬 사람들의 입이 이따만하게 벌어졌지 뭐예요.
그들은 그 큰 낫을 얻기 위해선 뭐든 주겠다고 동의했어요.
그래서 둘째는 말이 싣고 갈 수 있는 만큼 최대한의 금화를 받았답니다. 
이제 막내가 고양이를 들고 한 몫 하러 출발했어요.
하지만 운은 그도 다른 형제들과 마찬가지였어요.
그가 가는 족족 육지의 어느 곳이든 고양이가 없는 곳이 없었거든요.
모든 곳에 이미 고양이들이 살고 있었고, 어떤 지역에는 고양이들이 너무 많아 갓 태어난 어린 고양이들을 연못에 빠뜨리기까지 하던 걸요.
마침내 막내도 배를 타고 어느 섬으로 건너가니, 천만다행이게도 거긴 이제껏 그 누구도 고양이를 본 적이 없었어요.
생쥐들이 땅 위를 차지한 거는 둘째 치고 정말이지 모든 가정의 식탁 위에서든 긴 의자에서든 지들끼리 춤을 추며 생난리를 피우고 있었죠. 그건 왕이 궁전도 마찬가지였어요.
사람들은 또한 쥐로 인한 전염병인 페스트를 끔찍이도 두려워하고 있었어요.
궁전에 사는 왕 자신조차도 페스트로부터 안전하지 않았으니까요.
게다가 생쥐들이 모든 구석탱이에서 찍찍 울어대고, 이빨로 물 수 있는 건 뭐든 갉아먹었어요.
하지만 이제부턴 고양이가 사냥을 시작했죠, 곧 두 서 너 방들에서 생쥐가 말끔히 사라졌어요.
사람들은 왕에게 왕국을 위해 이 진기한 짐승을 사라 간청했어요.
왕은 기꺼이 달라는 금화를 주었지요.
막내는 노새(수나귀와 암말과의 잡종)에 가득 옮길 수 있는 금화를 받았답니다.
이 엄청난 금화를 들고 막내는 집으로 돌아갔지요.
고양이는 궁전에서 생쥐들을 잡으며 재밌어하고 있었어요. 그런데 셀 수도 없이 많이 생쥐를 죽이다 보니 결국 목이 말랐어요.
그래서 고양이가 서서 고개를 들어 올리며 울었지요.
“야옹, 야옹!”
이 희한한 비명을 들은 왕과 모든 사람들이 기겁을 하고선 공포에 질려 궁전 밖으로 한꺼번에 도망쳤어요.
그런 다음 왕은 이 짐승을 어찌 처리하면 좋을지 신하들에게 조언을 구했어요.
마침내 ‘사자’(왕의 심부름꾼)를 그 고양이에게 보내 궁전을 떠나줄 것을 요구하기로 결론이 났지요. 그리고 만에 하나 고양이가 거절하면 물리력을 동원해서라도 일을 처리하기로 결정했어요.
신하들이 말했어요.
“생쥐 때문에 괴로운 게 낫지, 왜냐면 생쥐는 익숙하니까요, 하지만 저런 괴물 짐승과 이 딴 식으로 생활을 함께 하는 건 정말 못해먹겠습니다요.”
그리하여 어느 귀족 젊은이가 그 임무를 수행하기 위해 고양이에게 보내졌어요.
“평화적으로 성에서 철수해주시겠습니까?”
하지만 고양이는 목에 갈증이 더 심해져 단지 이렇게 답할 뿐이었어요.
“야옹! 야옹!”
이 말을 젊은이는 “절대 아냐! 절대 아냐!”라고 이해했어요, 그래서 이 대답을 왕께도 전해드렸지요.
“그렇담,”라며 신하들이 말했어요. “무력으로 그녀(고양이)를 굴복시키는 수밖에.”
대포들이 밖으로 꺼내지고, 궁전이 곧 화염에 휩싸였어요.
불길은 고양이가 앉아 있던 방에까지 번졌어요, 고양이는 창문을 통해 안전하게 도망쳐버렸지요.
하지만 모든 궁전이 와르르 무너질 때까지 왕과 섬사람들의 포위 공격은 멈추지 않았답니다. 말 그대로 쑥대밭이 된 거죠. (~^.^;;)

(동화 끝)

동화 「세 행운아」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「세 행운아」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter70.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



71. 여섯 사나이의 신나는 모험



옛날 옛적에 온갖 기술에 능통해 전쟁에도 참여하고 무척이나 용감히 잘 싸운 한 남자가 있었어요.
하지만 전쟁이 끝이 나자 해고를 통보받았는데 그 동안의 노고에 대한 보상으로 동전 딸랑 세 개만 받았어요.
“얼씨구,”라며 그가 말했어요. “내가 이걸로 만족할 거 같아. 합당한 인재들을 구해 왕이 나라의 보물 전부를 내게 주게 만들고 말겠어.”
그가 분통을 터뜨리며 숲으로 들어가니, 어떤 사나이가 마치 곡식 베듯 나무 여섯 그루를 뿌리까지 잡아 뽑고 있는 게 아니겠어요.
그가 그 사나이에게 말했어요.
“내 부하가 되어 나와 함께 가지 않겠나?”
“그러죠,”라며 사나이가 대답했어요. “하지만 우선 어머니가 계시는 집에 땔감 좀 챙겨드리고요.”
그러더니 사나이는 뽑은 나무들 중 하나로 나머지 다섯 그루를 감싸더니 등에 휙 둘러매곤 가버렸어요.
그런 다음 사나이는 돌아오더니 대장과 함께 길을 떠났어요.
대장이 말했어요.
“우리 둘이면 이 세상에서 못 헤쳐 나갈 일이 없을 거야.”
그들이 잠시 걸어가니, 이번엔 어떤 사냥꾼이 무릎을 꿇고 앉아선 총을 겨누며 막 발사를 하려고 하고 있었어요.
대장이 그에게 말했어요.
“사냥꾼, 뭘 쏘아 맞추려는 거요?”
그가 대답했어요.
“3킬로미터 밖에 떨어진 떡갈나무 가지 위에 앉아있는 파리의 왼쪽 눈을 맞추려던 참이오.”
“오, 우리와 함께 갑시다.”라며 대장이 말했어요. “우리 셋이면, 이 세상에 못 헤쳐나갈 게 없다니까!”
사냥꾼이 짐을 챙기곤 대장을 따라 나섰어요.
그들이 가니 이번엔, 빠른 속도로 빙글빙글 돌고 있는 일곱 개의 풍차들이 나왔어요.
어머나, 풍차는 도는데 서풍도, 동풍도, 남풍도, 북풍도 한 점 없고 나뭇잎 하나 팔랑이지 않았지요.
그때 대장이 말했어요.
“그 참 휘한하네, 그럼 풍차를 누가 돌린단 말이야, 바람 한 점 없는데.”
그가 부하들과 함께 더 걸어가 봤어요.
그들이 3킬로미터를 걸어가니, 어떤 사나이가 나무 위에 앉아 한쪽 콧구멍을 막고서 다른 쪽 콧구멍만으로 콧바람을 내뿜고 있었어요.
“세상에 맙소사! 자네 지금 뭐하는 건가?”
사나이가 대답했어요.
“여기서 3킬로미터 밖에 풍차 일곱 개가 있지 않았소, 보시오, 내가 지금 그 풍차들을 돌리고 있는 중이니까.”
“오, 우리와 함께 가세나.”라며 대장이 말했어요. “우리 넷이면 이 세상에 무서울 게 뭐 있겠나!” 
강풍을 내뿜던 사나이가 내려와 대장과 함께 갔어요.
잠시 후 그들의 눈에 이번엔, 어떤 사나이가 한쪽 다리만으로 서 있는게 보였어요. 다른 쪽 다리는 떼어서 옆에다 놓아두고 있는 사나이였어요.
그래서 대장이 말했어요.
“휴식을 취하는 자네 폼이 참 휘한하네 그려.”
“나는 달리기 선수요,”라며 사나이가 대꾸했어요. “너무 멀리 빠르게 달려와 쉬고 있는 거요, 다리 한 짝을 떼어놓은 건, 그러지 않음, 내가 새보다 더 빨라 날아갈 수 있기 때문이오.”
“오, 우리랑 함께 가세. 우리 다섯이면, 헤쳐 나가지 못할 일이 어디 있겠는가.”  
그리하여 그 사나이가 그들과 함께 하게 되었어요.
그들이 멀리 가지 않았을 때 이번엔 모자를 쓴 사나이 한 명과 마주치게 되었어요. 그는 한쪽 귀가 다 덮이도록 모자를 푹 눌러쓰고 있었어요.
그래서 대장이 그에게 말했어요.
“멋쟁이야, 멋쟁이, 모자를 그렇게 한쪽 귀까지 눌러쓰지 말게나, 꼭 바보처럼 보이지 않는가!”
“이러지 않을 수 없소이다.”라며 그가 말했어요. “내 모자를 바로 하면, 지독한 추위가 몰려오거든요. 자칫 하늘을 나는 모든 새들이 얼어 땅바닥으로 떨어질 수 있수다.”
“오, 자네 우리랑 함께 가세,”라며 대장이 말했어요. “우리 여섯 사람이면 이 세상에 무서울 게 그 무엇이겠는가.”  
이제 여섯 명은 어떤 도시에 도착했어요.
그곳 왕은 누구든 달리기 경주에서 자신의 딸을 이기는 사람을 남편으로 삼을 거라 선포한 상태였지요. 대신 질 경우 목숨을 내놓아야했어요.
그때 대장이 나서며 말했어요.
“좋소, 내가 하겠소, 다만, 내 부하를 대신 시합에 내보내도 되겠소.”
왕이 대꾸했어요.
“그렇담, 네 목은 물론 네 부하의 목까지 같이 걸고 임해라.”
그리하여 시합이 준비되자, 달리기 선수 사나이가 다른 쪽 다리를 몸에 붙이며 대장에게 말했어요.
“이제 빠르게 달릴 수 있으니 승리는 따 놓은 당상이오.”
시합은, 멀리 떨어진 우물에서 물을 빨리 길어오는 사람이 이기는 경기였어요.
달리기 선수도 물주전자 하나를 받았고, 공주도 역시 물주전자를 받았어요.
그들이 동시에 달리기 시작했어요. 하지만 공주가 즉시 아주 멀리 가 있었지만, 달리기 선수는 마치 바람이 휘파람을 불 듯 아예 사람들 시야에서 멀찍이 벗어나 있었어요.
그는 곧 우물에 도착해 물주전자에 물을 담은 다음 돌아섰어요.
결승점을 반쯤 남겨놓고 그는 몹시도 피곤했어요. 그래서 물주전자를 내려놓고 드러누워 잠깐 눈을 붙였지요.
하지만 그는 곯아떨어지는 것을 방지하고 금방 잠에서 깨기 위해, 땅바닥에 있던 말의 해골 하나를 베개로 삼았어요.
한편 달리기에 관해서라면 누구 못지않게 빨랐던 공주 또한 우물에 도착해 물주전자에 물을 담아 들고 서둘러 돌아가고 있었어요. 그러다 달리기 선수가 누워 자는 것을 보곤 기뻐하며 말했지요.
“적이 손안에 들어왔군.”
그러면서 그의 물주전자를 비우고 달리기를 계속했어요.
이때 모두가 달리기 선수를 시야에서 놓쳤지만, 유일하게 시력이 좋은 사냥꾼만은 성 꼭대기에 서서 예리한 시력으로 모든 걸 보고 있었어요. 
그가 말했어요.
“공주가 우릴 이기게 놔둘 순 없지.”
그가 총을 겨누더니 정확하게, 달리기 선수가 머리에 베고 있던 말의 해골을 명중시켰어요. 물론 달리기 선수는 다치지 않았지요.
그 바람에 달리기 선수가 벌떡 깨며 일어나보니 자신의 물주전자는 비어있고, 공주는 이미 저 멀찍이 앞서가고 있었어요.
그는 상심할 겨를이 없었어요. 그가 즉시 물주전자를 들고 우물로 되돌아가 물을 담은 다음 다시 결승점을 향해 뛰기 시작해 공주보다 장장 10분이나 일찍 도착했어요.
“보라!”라며 그가 말했어요. “지금까지 뛴 건 뛴 것도 아니라 내 그러지 않았는가.” 
이 바람에 왕은 참담했고, 공주의 마음은 더욱 참담했어요. 이 나라에 흔해빠진 제대 군인에게 시집가게 생겼으니까요.
그래서 왕과 공주가 어떻게 하면 그와 그의 동료들을 없앨지 모의하기 시작했어요.
그때 왕이 그녀에게 말했어요.
“내게 좋은 생각이 났다. 걱정 말거라. 그들은 다시 돌아가지 못할 것이다.”
그런 다음 왕이 그들에게 말했어요.
“이제 너희들은 함께 즐기며 먹고 마시거라.”
왕이 그들을 데리고 어느 방으로 데리고 갔어요. 그 방은 바닥도 철이고, 문들도 철이고, 창문들도 모두 쇠창살이 쳐져 있었지요.  
그 방엔 식탁이 하나 놓여있는데, 그 위에 맛있는 음식이 가득했어요.
왕이 그들에게 말했어요.
“어서들 마음껏 들게나.”
그들이 안으로 들어갔을 때, 왕이 문을 닫고 잠그라 지시를 내렸어요.
그런 다음 왕은 요리사를 불러 방바닥이 새빨갛게 달구어질 때까지 불을 때라 일렀어요.
요리사가 정말 그렇게 했어요.
식탁에 앉아 음식을 먹던 여섯 명은 배가 불러 약간 덥게 느껴지는 거라 여겼지만, 이것도 한 두 번이지, 계속 뜨거워지자 밖으로 나가고 싶어했어요. 하지만 이미 모든 문들과 창문들이 잠가진 상태였어요. 그제야 그들은 깨달았어요. 왕이 적의를 가지고 그들을 숨 막혀 죽게 하려는 것이라고요.  
“하지만 왕의 뜻대로야 안 되지.”라며 모자를 쓴 사나이가 말했어요. “내가 이제부터, 열기도 수줍어서 슬금슬금 도망갈 강추위를 불러오겠네.”
그가 모자를 똑바로 쓰자, 즉시 추위가 밀려들고 열기는 싹 사라졌어요.
어찌나 추운지 접시에 담긴 음식들까지도 얼기 시작한 걸요. 
한 두 시간이 지나자, 왕은 그들이 이미 다 열에 익혀 죽었을 거라 생각하고서, 문을 열고 직접 확인해보았어요.
하지만 문들을 열었을 때, 여섯 명 모두 멀쩡히 산 채 거기 쪼그리고 앉아서 “접시에 담긴 음식이 죄다 얼 정도 추워 죽겠으니 제발 불 좀 때 달라”고 말했어요.
이 바람에 불 같이 화가 난 왕이 아래로 가 요리사를 꾸짖으며 “왜 내가 이른 대로 하지 않은 게냐?”라고 말했어요.
하지만 요리사는 대답했어요.
“아닌뎁쇼. 불은 충분히 세게 달구었는데요. 직접 확인해보십시오.”
요리사가 철제 방아래서 사납게 이글거리고 있는 불을 보여주었어요.
그제야 왕은 이 방법으로는 여섯 명을 죽일 수 없다는 걸 인지하게 되었어요. 
왕은 또 곰곰이 생각하기 시작했어요.
‘어떻게 하면 이 불청객들을 없앨 수 있을까?’
그래서 그들의 대장을 불러 말했어요.
“내 딸과의 결혼을 포기하면, 네가 원하는 만큼 금화를 주겠다.”
“오, 예, 국왕폐하,”라며 그가 대답했어요. “제 부하가 가지고 갈 수 있는 만큼을 주십시오. 그럼 당신의 따님을 요구하지 않겠습니다.”
이 말에 왕이 크게 만족해했어요.
상대방이 말했어요.
“14일 후에 다시 와서 가져가겠나이다.”
그 후 즉시 그는 온 나라에 있는 모든 재봉사들을 모아 14일 동안 앉아서 자루를 만들게 했어요.
그게 마련되자, 나무도 뿌리 채 뽑았던 사나이가 그걸 등에 짊어지고는 왕에게 갔어요.
왕이 말했어요.
“아니 어떻게 집채만 한 자루를 등에 이고 갈 수 있는 힘돌이가 있을 수 있단 말이냐?”
왕이 놀라하며 말했어요.
“도대체 얼마나 많은 금화를 가져가려고!” 
그런 다음 왕은 1톤의 금화를 가져오게 지시를 내렸어요.
왕의 가장 힘센 부하들 16명이 끙끙대며 그걸 가져오자, 힘돌이는 한 손으로 후딱 집어 자루 속에 던져버렸어요.
힘돌이가 말했어요.
“더 없소? 바닥도 안 찼지 않소!”
그리하여 차츰차츰 왕이 궁전에 있는 보물들을 죄다 거리로 가져오게 했고, 그럴 때마다 힘돌이는 자루 속에 던져 넣었지만, 에계계, 고작 반도 다 차지 못했어요.
“부스러기들 말고,”라며 힘돌이가 말했어요. “더 가져오시오.”
그리하여 7천개나 되는 달구지(바퀴 2개 마차)들이 온 나라에 있는 금화란 금화는 죄다 싣고 와야 했고, 그럴 때마다 힘돌이는 금화와 그걸 끌고 온 수소들을 자루 속에 던지며,
“더 달란 말이야 더, 자루가 가득 차려면 아직 멀었어.”라고 말했어요.
그걸 다 넣고서도, 아직 자루에 여유가 있었지만 힘돌이는 그만 말했어요.
“이쯤하면 됐다. 배부르기 전에 그만 둘 줄도 알아야 한단 말도 있으니까.”
그래서 그가 자루를 등에 둘러메고 동료들과 함께 가버렸어요.
그 한 명이 온 날의 전 재산을 짊어지고 가는 꼴을 보자 왕은 눈이 돌아 불같이 화를 내며 자신의 기병들에게 말을 타고 저들을 뒤쫓아 가서 힘돌이에게서 자루를 뺏어오라 명령했어요.
2개 기병연대(군대)가 급속히 여섯 명을 추적하며 소리쳤어요.
“너희들은 포위되었다, 어서 금화가 든 자루를 내려놓아라, 그렇지 않음 도륙을 내리라!”
“뭐라는 거여?”라며 강풍을 부는 사나이가 말했어요. “우리들이 포위되었다고! 그럴 바에야 내가 너희들을 공중으로 날려 보내는 게 더 빠르겠다.”
그가 한 쪽 콧구멍을 막더니 다른 쪽 콧구멍으로 강풍을 내뿜어 2개 기병연대를 날려버렸어요.
그 바람에 기병들은 뿔뿔이 날려 산 이쪽과 저쪽 너머 푸른 창공(하늘) 속으로 날아가 버렸지요.
부사관 한 명이 “살려 달라”고 싹싹 빌었어요.
그는 아홉 군데나 상처를 입었는데 그 상처의 개수가 말해주는 대로 용맹한 기병이었지요.
그가 다치지 않게 다시 착지할 수 있도록 강풍을 부는 사나이가 잠시 콧바람을 멈추었어요. 
강풍을 부는 사나이가 그에게 말했어요.
“자 궁전에 있는 자네들 왕에게 돌아가 전하게, 더 많은 기병들이 온다 해도, 내가 죄다 공중으로 날려버릴 거라고.”
이 말을 전해들은 왕이 말했어요.
“그 불한당(깡패)들을 가게 내버려둬라. 볼 장 다 봤다.”
그리하여 여섯 명은 그 엄청난 재물들을 집으로 가지고 가, 나누어가진 다음, 죽을 때까지 만족해하며 잘 살았데요.

(동화 끝)

동화 「여섯 사나이의 모험」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「여섯 사나이의 모험」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter71.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



72. 늑대와 사람



옛날 옛적에요, 여우가 사람의 힘에 대해 늑대에게 얘기를 들려주고 있었어요.
“어떤 동물도 사람을 당해낼 순 없어. 동물들이 몸보신하려면 약삭빠르게 인간에게 헌신해야해.”
그러자 늑대가 같잖다는 듯 대답했지요.
“난 말이야 한 번도 인간 따위를 본 적이 없어서 말이야, 어디 그 낯짝이라도 한 번 보면 내가 기습해버릴 텐데 말이야.”
“그거라면 내가 도와줄 수 있어.”라며 여우가 말했어요. “내일 아침 일찍 나를 따라와 봐, 그럼 내가 인간을 보여줄게.”
늑대가 약속 시간에 늦지 않게 나타나자, 여우가 그를 데리고 사냥꾼이 매일 다니는 길로 들어섰어요.
첫 번째로, 퇴역한 노병 한 명이 오고 있었어요. 
“저게 사람이야?”라며 늑대가 물었어요.
“아니,”라며 여우가 대답했지요. “사람이‘었’어.”
그 후 어린 꼬마가 학교에 가려고 오고 있었어요.
“저게 사람이야?”
“아니, 곧 사람이 ‘될’ 거야.”
마침내 등에 총구멍이 두 개인 소총을 메고, 양 허리에 단검을 찬 사냥꾼이 한 명 오고 있었어요.
여우가 늑대에게 말했어요.
“봐, 저게 사람이야, 그를 공격하면 돼, 그럼 난 내 굴로 가 있을 게.”
그래서 늑대가 사람에게 달려들었어요.
늑대를 본 사냥꾼이 말했어요.
“총알을 가득 장전해두는 건데.”
조준하더니 늑대의 얼굴에 발사했어요.
늑대의 찌푸린 얼굴이 찢어졌어요.
하지만 늑대는 겁먹지 않고 재차 그를 공격했어요.
그 사이 사냥꾼이 두 번째 총알을 발사했어요.
늑대는 통증을 꿀꺽 참았어요. 재차 사냥꾼을 향해 돌진했지요. 하지만 사냥꾼은 번쩍이는 단검을 꺼내더니 늑대의 왼쪽 오른쪽을 벴어요. 그 바람에 주변이 온통 피범벅이었어요.
늑대가 깨갱 물러나, 여우에게로 달려갔어요.
“어때, 늑대 형.”라며 여우가 말했어요. “해 볼만 했어?”
“아아!”라며 늑대가 대꾸했어요. “인간이란 게 그리 셀지 상상도 못했다! 처음엔, 어깨에서 막대기를 꺼내더니 ‘휴~’하고 입김을 불지 뭐냐 그 바람에 내 얼굴이 세게 따끔거리더구나, 그런 다음 그가 막대기로 입김을 한 번 더 부니 갑자기 내 코가 마치 번개와 우박에 맞은 듯 했고, 내가 아주 가까이 갔을 땐, 그가 허리춤에서 하얀 갈비뼈 하나를 꺼내더니 나를 사정없이 두들겨 패는 바람에 하마터면 맞아죽어서 드러누울 뻔 했다.”
“허풍을 뜬 결과를 좀 봐!”라며 여우가 말했어요. “되찾아올 수 없을 정도로 손도끼를 멀리 던진 꼴이잖아!”

(동화 끝)

동화 「늑대와 사람」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「늑대와 사람」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter72.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



73. 늑대와 여우



늑대가 여우를 그(늑대)와 함께 지내게 했는데, 그 바람에 늑대가 뭘 바라던 여우가 울며 겨자 먹기로 해야 했어요.
왜긴요, 여우가 더 약하니까, 두목의 말을 안 들으면 잡아먹힐 수도 있었고요. 
한번은 그들이 숲을 거니는데, 늑대가 말했어요.
“붉은여우야, 가서 먹을 것 좀 구해와 봐, 안 그럼 내가 널 대신 먹을 테야.”
그러자 여우가 대답했어요.
“새끼 양 두 마리가 있는 농장 주변 뜰을 알아. 네가 그렇다면, 내가 가서 한 마리만 가져올게.”
늑대도 구미가 당겼어요.
그들이 거기 가자, 여우가 어린 양을 훔쳐와 늑대에게 주고 자신은 가버렸어요.  
늑대가 그걸 삼켜버렸어요. 하지만 배가 안 불렀어요. 한 마리 더 먹을 요량으로 그가 들어갔어요. 
하지만 그의 서툰 동작 탓에 어린 양 엄마가 깨 비명을 지르며 “매애” 울기 시작했고, 그 바람에 농부가 달려왔어요.
늑대를 발견한 농부는 인정사정없이 늑대를 두들겨 팼어요.
결국 늑대가 절뚝거리고 울며 여우에게 갔어요.
“네 꾐에 빠져,”라며 늑대가 말했어요. “제길, 한 마리 더 먹으려다 시골 농부에게 들켜 녹초가 되도록 두들겨나 맞다니.”
여우가 대꾸했어요.
“넌 왜 그리 식탐을 부리니?”
다음날 그들이 다시 시골로 갔어요.
탐욕스런 늑대가 다시 말했어요.
“붉은여우야, 가서 먹을 걸 좀 구해오렴, 안 그럼 내가 대신 널 잡아먹을 테야.”
그러자 여우가 대답했어요.
“오늘밤 아내가 팬케이크들을 굽는 농가를 하나 아는데, 몇 개만 훔쳐오면 우리가 먹을 수 있을 거야.”
그들이 거기로 갔어요. 
여우가 그 농가에 몰래 들어가더니 이리 기웃 저리 기웃 하다 기어이 요리 있는 곳을 발견하고서 팬케이크 여섯 개만 끄집어내 입에 물고 늑대에게 돌아왔어요.
“이거면 되지.”라며 여우가 늑대에게 말한 후 자긴 가버렸어요.
늑대가 그 팬케이크를 단숨에 삼켜버렸어요.
그가 말했어요.
“하나만 더 먹고 싶은걸.”
그가 거리로 가더니 접시들을 몽땅 허물어뜨렸어요. 그 바람에 접시가 “쨍그랑” 소리를 내며 산산조각 나버렸어요.
이 소리가 너무도 컸기에 아내가 튀어나오다 늑대를 발견하곤 사람들을 불렀어요.
사람들이 허겁지겁 달려와 몽둥이로 늑대를 정말 비오는 날 먼지 나도록 두들겨 패버렸어요.  
결국 두 발을 절뚝거리며 큰 소리로 울며 늑대가 숲에 있던 여우에게로 돌아왔어요.
“아주 그냥 나를 나자빠지게 하려고 작정을 했더구나!”라며 늑대가 소리 질렀어요. “왜 이 참에 아주 그냥 농부보고 나를 잡아 가죽을 벗기라 그러지?”
하지만 여우는 대꾸했어요.
“넌 왜 그리 식탐을 부리니?”
셋째 날 그들이 함께 길을 나섰을 때, 늑대는 간신히 고통을 참아가며 절뚝거릴 수 있었어요.
늑대가 다시 이렇게 말했어요.
“붉은여우야, 가서 먹을 걸 좀 구해와 봐, 안 그럼 내가 대신 너를 잡아먹을 테야.”
여우가 대답했어요.
“가축을 잡고 있는 남자를 알아, 그가 소금에 절인 고기를 지하실 통에 놓고 있어. 가져올 수 있을 거야.”
늑대가 말했어요.
“이번엔 안속아, 나도 같이 갈래. 내가 못 빠져나올 거 같은 네가 나를 도와주어야해.”
“응 그럴게.”라며 여우가 말했어요.
여우가 늑대에게 샛길들을 알려주어 거기를 통해 마침내 그들은 지하실에 들어갈 수 있었어요.
거기엔 정말이지 고기가 산더미처럼 쌓여 있었어요.
늑대가 즉시 먹기 시작하며 생각했어요.
‘시간 있을 때 왕창 먹어둬야지!“
여우도 맛있게 먹었어요. 하지만 여우는 사방을 두리번거리며 종종 자신들이 들어왔던 구멍으로 가 자기 몸이 아직 거길 빠져나갈 정도로 홀쭉한지를 체크했어요.
늑대가 말했어요.
“사랑하는 여우야, 너 아까부터 이리 저리 뛰어다니며 왜 자꾸 들락날락거리는 거니?”
“누가 오나 보려는 거야.”라며 약삭빠른 친구(여우)가 대꾸했어요. “너무 많이 먹진 말거라!”
그러자 늑대가 말했어요.
“통에 든 거 다 먹어치울 때까진 안 가.”
한편 농부는, 여우가 폴짝폴짝 거리는 소음을 듣고 지하실로 와보았어요.
여우는 농부를 보자마자 한번 만에 구멍으로 쏙 빠져나가버렸어요.
늑대도 여우를 따라가려했지만 너무 많이 먹은 바람에 통과하지 못하고 몸이 단단히 끼고 말았어요.
그러자 농부가 잔인한 몽둥이를 쥐고 오더니 늑대를 때려 죽여 버렸어요.
하지만 성공적으로 숲으로 도망친 여우는, 이 식탐꾸러기 형에게서 벗어난 게 너무도 기뻤답니다.

(동화 끝)

동화 「늑대와 여우」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「늑대와 여우」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter73.html 
 
읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



74. 여우와 사촌



엄마늑대가 아기늑대를 출산했어요. 그녀는 자기 사촌인 여우를 아기 ‘대부’(아기 세례식 때 참석하는 남성후견인)로 초대했어요.
“무엇보다, 그(여우)는 우리 늑대들의 가까운 친척이고,”라며 그녀는 말했어요. “이해력도 풍부하고 재능도 많은 분이시지. 그 분이라면 우리 어린 아들을 잘 가르쳐주고 세상을 살아가는데 지도해주실 수 있을 거야.”
여우 또한 세례식에 참석하여 상당히 고상한 척 꾸미며 말했어요.
“존경하는 수다쟁이 부인, 제게 이런 영광을 주셔서 감사합니다. 오늘 일에 관해선 당신이 꼭 보답을 받게 되리라 말씀드리고 싶군요.”
여우(남자)는 만찬을 맛있게 들고 흥겹게 놀다 갔어요.
후에 그가 말했어요.
“친애하는 수다쟁이 부인, 우리 임무야 아이를 잘 키우는 거 아니겠습니까. 잘 키우려면 일단 우리부터 잘 먹여야하지 않겠습니까. 제가 한 마리씩 꿀꺽꿀꺽할 수 있는 좋은 양우리를 알고 있는데 말입니다.”
엄마늑대는 그 말에 귀가 쫑긋해져서, 여우를 따라 그 농장으로 갔어요.
여우(남자)가 저 멀리 깊게 패인 곳을 가리키더니 말했어요.
“저기로 기어 들어가면 눈에 띄지 않고 갈 수 있을 겝니다. 그 사이 저는 반대쪽을 돌며 혹시 물어갈 병아리 한 마리라도 없나 살펴보지요.”
하지만 여우(남자)는 거기로 가지 않고 그냥 숲 입구에 앉아 다리를 쭉 펴고 휴식을 취했어요.
엄마늑대는 가축우리로 기어 들어갔어요.
그런데 그 가축우리엔 개가 누워있었어요. 
개 짖는 소리에 농부들이 몰려오더니 엄마늑대를 향해 펄펄 끓는 물을 냅다 들이부었어요. 그 바람에 엄마늑대는 하마터면 살가죽이 몽땅 벗겨질 뻔했죠.
가까스로 탈출에 성공한 엄마늑대가 지친 몸을 질질 끌며 밖으로 나왔어요.
거기 누워 있던 여우는 불만이 가득한 척 연기를 하며 말했어요.
“아이고, 친애하는 부인, 내 몸이 지금 말이 아니야, 농부들이 내게 달려들어 다리몽둥이를 죄다 분질러 놨지 뭐야. 여기 더 있다간 정말 골로 갈 거 같은데, 나 좀 들어주겠는감.”
엄마늑대도 몸이 말이 아니었던지라 간신히 걸을 정도였지만 여우가 몹시 걱정되어 등에 업고는 조금씩 움직여 자신의(엄마늑대) 집까지 안전하게 옮겨다주었어요.
그때 여우가 엄마늑대를 향해 큰 소리로 말했어요.
“잘 있어요, 수다쟁이 부인, 오늘 어째 살만했는지 모르겠네.”
여우는 진심 그녀(엄마늑대)를 비웃어주더니 깡충깡충 뛰어 사라져버렸답니다. 

(동화 끝)

동화 「여우와 사촌」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「여우와 사촌」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter74.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



75. 여우와 고양이



우연히 고양이(여자)가 숲에서 여우(남자)를 만났어요.
고양이가 속으로 생각했어요.
“그는 영리하고 경험이 풍부해 세상에서도 인정받는 분이셔.”
고양이는 애교 섞인 목소리로 그에게 말했어요.
“안녕하세요(낮 인사), 여우 씨, 잘 지내세요? 살림은 어떠세요? 이 한겨울에도 지낼 만하신가요?”
온갖 건방짐으로 가득 차 있던 여우가 고양이 아가씨를 머리부터 발끝까지 훑어보더니 한참을 말을 않고 있었어요. 어떤 대답을 할지 말지를 잘 모르는 눈치였어요.
드디어 여우가 말했어요.
“오, 이제 보니 처량한 수염 청소부에, 얼룩빼기 얼뜨기에, 배고픈 쥐 사냥꾼이시잖아, 내 말을 어이 생각하오? 그런데 감히 내게 잘 지내냐고 묻다니? 그래 뭘 배웠소? 얼마나 많은 기술들을 가지고 있지?”
“저는 하나에만 정통해요.”라며 고양이가 겸손하게 대꾸했어요.
“그게 뭔데?”라며 여우가 물었어요.
“사냥개들이 저를 쫓아오면, 저는 나무 위로 튀어올라 제 목숨을 구할 줄 알아요.”
“그게 다요?”라며 여우(남자)가 말했어요. “나는 일백 가지 기술에 능통해, 소위 말하는 꾀돌이가 바로 나야. 허허, 참 별꼴이네, 나를 따라와 봐, 내가 사냥개들로부터 몸을 숨길 수 있는 기술을 특별히 아가씨에게 가르쳐줄 테니까.”
마침 그때 사냥꾼이 네 마리 개를 데리고 나타났어요.
고양이는 재빨리 나무 위로 튀어 올라 꼭대기에 앉아 가지들과 잎사귀들 속에 몸을 완전 숨겼어요.
“꾀주머니를 여세요, 여우 씨, 이제 꾀주머니를 여셔도 되요.”라며 고양이가 그에게 소리쳤어요.
하지만 개들이 벌써 그를 덥석 물어 뜯어버린걸요.
“아, 여우 씨.”라며 고양이가 비명을 질렀어요. “백가지 기술을 가지고도 대패(크게 패함)하시다니! 그러지 말고 그냥 저처럼 나무를 타고 기어올랐음, 죽진 않았을 거 아니에요.”

(동화 끝)

동화 「여우와 고양이」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「여우와 고양이」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter75.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



76. 카네이션 (패랭이꽃)



옛날 옛적에 하느님이 아이를 점지해주지 않은 왕비가 한 명 살고 있었어요.
그녀는 매일 아침 정원으로 가 아들이든 딸이든 낳게 해달라 하느님께 기도를 드렸답니다.
그때 하늘에서 천사가 한 명 내려와 말했어요.
“편히 있거라, 너는 곧 소망의 힘을 지닌 아들을 낳을 것이다, 그가 바라는 무든 이루어지리라.”
그녀가 왕에게 가 이 기쁜 기별(소식)을 말했어요.
날짜가 지나자 그녀가 아드님을 출산했어요. 
왕은 뛸 듯이 기뻤답니다.
그녀는 매일 아침 아이를 데리고 들짐승이 나오는 정원으로 가 맑은 개울물에 몸을 씻었어요. 
그러다 한 번은 우연히도, 아이가 아직 어리고 엄마 품에 누워있을 때 그녀가 잠이 들었어요.
그때 아이가 지닌 소망의 힘을 잘 아는 늙은 요리사가 오더니 아이를 훔쳐 감추곤, 암탉을 한 마리 가져와 찢어 왕비의 앞치마와 옷에 몇 방울의 핏방울을 떨어뜨리고 갔어요.
요리사는 아이를 비밀 장소에 숨기곤, 유모보고 아이 젖을 주게 했어요.
그런 다음 그는 왕에게 가 “들짐승이 아이를 물고 가게 했나이다.”라며 왕비를 고소했어요.
왕비의 앞치마에 묻은 피를 본 왕이 그 말을 철썩 같이 믿고 분노에 잠겨 “해와 달도 들지 않는 높은 탑을 지어 왕비를 가두고 입구를 막아버려라.”라고 명령했어요.
그렇게 왕비는 음식도 물도 없이 굵으며 7년을 갇혀있어야 했어요.
하지만 하느님은 천국의 천사 두 명을 하얀 비둘기로 변신시켜 내려 보내시어 하루에 두 번 그녀가 먹을 음식을 7년 간 날라주게 했어요.
하지만 요리사가 속으로 생각했어요.
“그토록 소망의 힘이 있는 아이라면 떨어져 있다 내가 좋지 않은 일을 당할 수 있지.”
그래서 그는 궁전을 떠나 소년에게로 갔어요. 
그때 소년도 이제 말을 할 만큼 컸답니다.
요리사가 소년에게 말했어요.
“정원 딸린 아름다운 궁전을 소망해 보거라, 정원과 그 밖에 모든 게 딸려 있는 궁전 말이다.”
소년의 입에서 말이 새어나오자마자 소망한 모든 게 나타났어요.
잠시 후 요리사가 소년에게 말했어요.
“너무 혼자인 것도 좋지 않으니, 동무로 지낼 아름다운 소녀를 소망해보거라.”
왕자가 소망하자, 어떤 화가가 그린 그림보다 아름다운 그녀가 즉시 그 앞에 서 있었어요.
두 사람은 함께 놀며 진심으로 서로를 사랑했어요.
그리고 늙은 요리사는 귀족처럼 사냥하느라 바빴어요.
하지만 문득 요리사에게 이런 생각이 떠올랐어요.
‘왕자가 어느 날 자기 아빠한테 보내달라는 소원을 빌 수 있어. 그럼 난 큰 위험에 빠진다고.’
그래서 그는 그 처녀를 한쪽으로 불러 말했어요.
“오늘밤 소년이 잠들거든 그의 침대로 가서 이 칼로 그 심장을 지르고, 그 증거로 내게 그의 심장과 혀를 가져오느라, 만약 내 말대로 하지 않을 시, 네가 죽을지 알거라.”  
그런 까닭에 그가 집을 비웠다가 다음날 돌아왔지만, 그녀는 그러지 않았어요.
그녀가 말했어요.
“왜 어떤 영혼도 단 한 번 해치지 않은 순진무구한 소년이 피를 흘려야 해요?”
요리사가 다시 한 번 말했어요.
“네가 그를 죽이지 않음, 네가 죽을 줄 알란 말이다.”
그가 집을 비웠을 때, 그녀는 어린 암사슴을 데려와 죽이곤 심장과 혀를 꺼내 접시에 담았어요.
늙은 남자(요리사)가 돌아오는 게 보이자 그녀가 소년에게 말했어요.
“네 침대로 들어가 꼼짝 말고 누워 있어.”
그때 사악한 인간(요리사)이 방으로 들어와 말했어요.
“소년의 심장과 혀는 어디 있느냐?”
소녀가 접시를 그에게 내밀었어요.
그때 왕자가 이불을 벗어던지며 말했어요.
“이 비열한 죄인아, 너는 어찌하여 나를 죽이려하느냐? 내가 너를 판결할 것이다. 너는 ‘검은 푸들’(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/poH3kU )이 되어 목에 금 목걸이를 하고서 이글거리는 석탄을 삼켜 목구멍에서 불꽃을 뿜게 되리라.”
그가 이 말을 하자마자 늙은 남자가 푸들개로 변하더니 목에 금 목걸이를 했어요. 요리사들이 명을 받고 타고 있는 석탄들을 대령하자, 목구멍에서 불꽃이 나올 때까지 푸들개가 그걸 먹었어요.
왕자는 거기에 좀 더 머물렀어요.
그러다 엄마에 대한 기억이 떠올랐죠. 
‘엄마가 아직 살아계실까?’ 궁금했어요.
마침내 그가 처녀에게 말했어요.
“고향으로 돌아갈래, 너도 나랑 같이 가자. 너를 돌봐줄게.”
“아,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “너무 멀어. 알지도 못하는 낯선 땅에서 나보고 어찌 살려고?”
그녀는 썩 내켜하지 않았어요.
하지만 그들이 서로 떨어질 수 없다는 것도 분명했어요.
그래서 그는 소망했어요.
“그녀를 아름다운 ‘카네이션’(=패랭이꽃. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/AZJSsv ) 한 송이로 변하게 해주세요. 제가 가지고 갈 수 있게요.” 
그런 다음 그가 고향으로 출발했어요.
물론 푸들도 그를 뒤따라가야 했어요.
그가 엄마가 갇힌 그 탑에 도착했어요.
그 탑은 너무 높았죠.
그가 꼭대기까지 닿을 수 있는 사다리를 소망했어요.
그런 다음 그가 올라가 안을 들여다보며 소리쳤어요.
“사랑하는 엄마이자, 귀한 왕비시여, 아직 살아 계신 가오, 아님 돌아가셨나요?”
그녀가 대답했어요.
“방금 배를 채워 아직 배가 부르답니다.”
왜냐면 그녀는 천사들이 온 거라 여겼거든요.
그가 말했어요.
“저는 당신의 아들입니다. 들짐승이 당신 품에서 낚아채갔다는 그 아들 말입니다. 제가 살아있느니 곧 엄마를 구해드릴게요.”
그가 다시 내려와 아빠에게 갔어요.
그는 자신을 낯선 사냥꾼이라 소개하며 자신을 채용해줄 수 있는지 물었어요.
왕이 “좋다. 네가 솜씨만 있고 사냥감을 잡아와줄 수만 있다면야.”라고 말했어요. 
왜냐하면 그 지역엔 사슴 한 마리 잡힌 적이 없기 때문이었죠. 
사냥꾼(왕자)은 “궁전 식탁에 거나하게 차릴 수 있는 많은 사냥감을 잡아와드리겠습니다”라고 약속했어요.
그가 사냥꾼들을 모두 모이게 했어요. 그런 다음 그들을 데리고 숲으로 갔어요.
그가 커다란 원을 하나 그리더니, 자신이 서 있는 한 쪽 끝을 개방한 다음, 소망하기 시작했어요.
곧 2백 마리 이상의 사슴들이 원안으로 달려들어 왔어요.
사냥꾼들이 그들을 향해 총을 쏘았답니다.
60대의 ‘달구지’(바퀴 2개 마차)들에 실려 사냥감들이 왕에게로 운반되었어요.
이 한 번의 사냥에서 수년 동안 먹어도 남을 사냥감들이 수북이 왕의 식탁 위에 쌓였답니다.
이에 왕이 크게 기뻐하며 다음날 그(왕자)와 함께 먹을 수 있도록 상을 차리자 명령했어요.
다음날 모두 모이자, 왕이 사냥꾼(왕자)에게 말했어요.
“대단히 총명하구나, 내 옆에 앉거라.”
그가 대답했어요.
“폐하, 황송하옵니다. 제가 어찌 그럴 수 있겠습니까, 저는 그냥 평범한 사냥꾼인걸요.”
하지만 왕이 계속 우기며 말했어요.
“내 옆에 앉거라.”
결국 그(왕자)가 그리했어요.
그(왕자)는 거기 앉아 있는 동안 사랑하는 엄마를 생각하고 있었어요. 
그래서 그(왕자)가 소망했어요.
‘왕의 충성스런 신하들 중 한 명이 엄마에 대해 말을 꺼내 탑에 갇힌 왕비가 아직 살아 계신지 아님 돌아가신 건지 여쭙는 말을 하기를.’
그(왕자)가 소망하자마자, 대장(육군원수)이 말을 꺼내기 시작했어요.
“폐하, 저희는 여기서 편히 있지만, 탑에 갇히신 왕비님께선 어찌 지내시는지? 아직 살아 계신지 아님 돌아가셨는지요?”
하지만 왕이 대꾸했어요.
“그녀는 내 사랑하는 아들이 들짐승에게 찢어죽게 했다. 그녀 이름을 다시는 꺼내지 말라.”
그때 사냥꾼(왕자)이 일어나며 말했어요.
“인자하신 아바마마시여, 그 분은 아직 살아 계십니다. 저는 그녀의 아들입니다. 저는 들짐승에게 물려갔던 것이 아니라 사악한 늙은 요리사에 의해 잠들어 있던 그녀의 품에서 훔쳐진 것입니다. 그녀의 앞치마에 병아리 피를 흩뿌린 것도 그 요리사였습니다.”
그 후 즉시 그(왕자)가 금 목걸이를 한 개(푸들)를 보여드리며 말했어요.
“이것이 바로 그 비열한입니다!”
타고 있는 석탄들을 가져오게 하자, 이것을 그 개가 사람들이 보는 앞에서 먹더니, 목구멍에서 불꽃을 내뿜었어요.
그러자 사냥꾼(왕자)이 왕에게 “이 개의 진짜 모습을 보시고 싶으신지요?”라고 묻고는, 요리사 본래 모습으로 돌아오길 소망했어요.
그 후 즉시 요리사가 새하얀 앞치마를 하고서 양쪽 허리에 식칼을 하고서 서 있었어요.
왕이 이 요리사를 보자 역정이 무너지며 “당장 가장 깊은 지하 감옥에 쳐 넣어라!”고 명령했어요.
그런 다음 사냥꾼(왕자)은 추가적인 얘기들을 더 들려드리며 말했어요.
“아바마마, 저를 양육해주었고, 이후 저를 살해하라는 명령을 받았을 때 제 생명을 구해준 여인을 보시고 싶으십니까?”
왕이 대답했어요.
“그래, 그녀를 보고 싶구나.”
아들이 말했어요.
“자비로우신 아버님, 제가 당신 앞에 아름다운 꽃 한 송이를 보여드리겠나이다.”
그러더니 그(왕자)는 호주머니 속에 손을 집어넣더니 ‘카네이션’(=패랭이꽃)을 꺼내 국왕의 테이블 위에 올려놓았어요.
그 꽃이 너무도 아름다웠기 때문에 왕은 이때껏 그와 비슷한 것을 본 적이 없었지요.
그때 아들이 말했어요.
“이제 그녀의 본래 모습을 보여드리겠나이다.”
본래 처녀의 모습으로 되돌려 달라 그가 소망하자, 어떤 화가가 그린 그림보다 훨씬 더 아름다운 그녀가 앞에 서 있었어요. 
왕이 두 명의 시녀와 두 명의 시종(하인)을 탑으로 보내 왕비를 궁전으로 데려오시게 했어요.
그녀가 인도되어 왔을 때 그녀는 아무것도 먹지 않으며 말했어요.
“탑에서 저를 보살펴주신, 은혜롭고 자비로우신 하느님께서 저를 곧 부르실 것이옵니다.”
그녀는 3일을 더 살았어요. 그런 다음 행복하게 숨을 거두었지요.
그녀가 땅에 묻히자, 탑에 있던 그녀에게 음식을 날라다 주던 천사들인 새하얀 비둘기 두 마리가 그녀를 기리며 무덤 위에 살포시 앉았어요.
나이 드신 왕은 그 요리사의 ‘사지’(두 팔과 두 다리)를 찢어죽이게 했어요.
하지만 슬픔이 너무 크게 마음을 짓눌렸기에 왕도 곧 돌아가시고 말았답니다.
그의 아들은, 자신의 호주머니 속에 넣어가지고 왔던 한 송이 꽃이었던 그 아리따운 처녀와 결혼식을 올렸답니다.
그들이 아직도 살아 있는지 아닌지는, 글쎄요, 하느님만 아시지 않을까요.

(동화 끝)

동화 「카네이션 (패랭이꽃)」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「카네이션 (패랭이꽃)」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter76.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



77. 영리한 그레텔



예전에 ‘그레텔’(여자이름)이라는 이름을 가진 요리사가 있었어요.
그녀는 꽃무늬 장식이 새겨진 구두를 신고 밖으로 나가 이리 저리 돌며 생각했지요.
“너 참 예쁘다 얘!”
그리곤 집으로 돌아와 진심 기뻐하며 포도주를 한 잔 쭉 들이켰어요.
포도주를 마셨더니 식욕이 당기네요.
그래서 요리한 것들 중에서 가장 맛난 것만 배부를 때까지 맛을 보았답니다.
그녀가 말했어요.
“요리사라면 맛이 어떤 가 정도는 알아둬야 해.”
그러던 어느 날, 하루는 주인님이 그녀를 불러 말했어요.
“그레텔, 저녁에 손님이 오실 거니, 닭 두 마리만 맛나게 요리해두거라.”
“네 그럴게요, 주인님.”라며 그레텔이 대답했어요.
그녀는 닭 두 마리를 죽인 다음, 끊는 물에 씻어, 털을 잡아 뽑은 다음, 쇠꼬챙이에 꽂았다, 저녁이 가까워지자 불가에 올려놓고 구웠지요.
닭들이 갈색으로 변하기 시작해 거의 다 익어갔지만, 손님은 여전히 도착하지 않았어요.
그때 그레텔이 주인님에게 큰소리로 말했어요.
“손님 분 안 오실 거면, 닭을 불에서 빼 놓을 게요. 가장 육즙이 좋을 때 바로 먹지 않음 안 되거든요.”
주인이 말했어요.
“내가 직접 가보고 손님을 데려오마.”
주인이 등을 보이고 떠나자, 그레텔이 닭을 꽂은 쇠꼬챙이를 한쪽으로 치우며 생각했지요.
“불에 너무 오래 두면 딱딱해지니까, 그런데 언제 오실지 누가 알겠어? 그 사이 지하 포도주 저장실로 가 한 잔만 하고 올까.”
그녀가 아래로 가 한 잔 따르며 말했어요.
“하느님의 축복이 있기를, 그레텔.”
그래서 한 잔 쭉 들이켰더니, 한 잔이 더 댕겨 한 잔을 더 들이켰지요.
그런 다음 올라와 닭들을 불에 다시 올려놓고 양념을 바르고 명량하게 쇠꼬챙이를 돌렸지요.
그런데 익는 냄새가 기가 막힌 거예요.
그레텔이 생각했어요.
“나쁜 짓 하는 게 아냐, 그냥 맛만 보는 거야!”
그녀가 손가락으로 닭을 쿡 찔러보고 말했어요.
“아! 기가 막히게 익었네! 익었을 때 바로 먹지 않음 하느님께 죄 짓는 건데!”
그녀가 창가로 달려가 주인님이 손님을 데로고 오시는지 아닌지 살펴보았지만, 아무도 보이지 않아, 그냥 닭으로 돌아와 생각했어요.
“어, 날개 하나가 다 타네! 차라리 떼어내 내가 먹는 게 낫겠다.”
그래서 그녀가 날개를 잘라내 맛나게 먹었어요.
다 먹고 나니 이런 생각이 드는 거예요.
‘나머지 날개를 놔두면, 주인님이 하나가 없어질 걸 아실 거 아냐.’
그래서 날개를 두 개다 먹어치웠지요.
그녀가 창가로 가 주인님이 오시는지 살폈지만 역시나 오시지 않았어요.
그때 문득 이런 생각이 들었어요.
‘언제 오실지 알고? 아예 안 오실 수도 있지. 다른 곳에 들렀을 수도 있고.’
그때 그녀가 말했어요.
“그래, 그레텔, 닭 한 마리 뚝딱 먹어치우자. 술도 한 잔 마시고, 그래 먹고 보는 거야. 먹고 죽은 귀신은 때깔도 곱되잖아, 하느님이 주신 선물을 마다할 리야 없지?”
그녀가 다시 지하 포도주 저장실로 달려가 한 잔 쭉 들이 키고 올라와 닭 한 마리를 환장하며 싹 해치워버렸어요.
그렇게 닭 한 마리를 꿀꺽했는데도 주인님은 여전히 돌아오지 않으셨어요.
그레텔이 다른 닭을 바라보며 말했어요.
“한 마리 남았네, 얘도 다른 친구와 함께 같은 곳으로 보내줘야 하는 거 아닐까, 둘 중 하나에게 좋은 건 다른 하나에게도 좋데 잖아. 그래 한 마리마저 먹는다고 크게 나쁜 것도 아냐.”
그래서 그녀가 진심 또 한 잔 들이키곤, 두 번째 닭이 첫 번째 닭과 다시 만날 수 있게 해주었어요. 
그녀가 한참 만족해하고 있는데, 주인이 도착하셔서 다급하게 부르셨어요.
“얘 서두러거라, 그레텔, 손님이 막 도착하실 거란다!”
“예, 나리, 곧 내드릴게요.”라며 그레텔이 대답했어요.
주인은 식탁이 제대로 놓여 있다 살펴본 다음, 커다란 식칼 두개를 쥐어들곤 싹싹 갈며, 닭을 썰어서 나누려고 했어요.
때마침 그때 손님이 도착해 정중하고 예의바르게 현관문을 노크했지요.    
그레텔이 냉큼 달려가 정말 그인지 확인해보니, 정말 손님이 와 계셨어요.
그녀가 자기 손가락으로 입술을 가리며 말했어요.
“쉿! 쉿! 빨리 도망치세요, 제 주인이 당신을 잡아다 뭔 나쁜 짓을 할지 몰라요. 당신에겐 저녁식사를 대접하겠다며 초대했겠지만, 그 분의 진짜 의도는 당신의 두 귀를 자르는 거예요. 지금 이 식칼 가는 소리가 들리시죠!”
손님은 그 말에 깜짝 놀라 허둥지둥 계단을 밟고 내려갔어요.
그레텔은 바보가 아니었어요. 그래서 자기 주인님에게 비명을 지르며 달려가 외쳤어요.
“세상에 누굴 초대하신 거예요!”
“왜, 왜그러니, 그레텔? 무슨 말을 하는 게냐?”
“아,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “제가 내오던 닭들을 그 분(손님)이 접시채로 낚아채 ‘토끼셨단’(도망갔단) 말예요!”
“이런 ‘변고’(사고)가 있나!”라며 주인님이 말하며 맛있는 닭고기를 애도했어요.
“아니 인간적으로 한 마리는 남겨놓아야 하는 거 아냐, 다 들고 가면 난 뭐 먹으라고.”
그가 손님을 멈춰 세우기 위해 소리를 질렀어요. 하지만 손님은 들은 척도 안 했어요.
주인이 손에 식칼을 여전히 쥔 채로 손님을 뒤쫓아 달려가며 소리쳤어요.
“하나만, 하나만.”
주인의 이 애틋한 외침은, 손님이 두 마리 다 들고튀지 말고 남은 한 마리라도 주고 가 달란 의미였지요.
하지만 손님은 자기(손님) 두 귀를 내놓고 가란 소리로밖엔 들리지 않은 걸요. 손님은 정말이지 꽁무니에 불이라도 붙은 듯, 두 귀를 보존하기 위해, 자기 집까지 죽기 살기로 뛰어갔답니다.

(동화 끝)

동화 「영리한 그레텔」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「영리한 그레텔」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter77.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



78. 노인과 손자



한때 아주 나이든 노인이 한 명 살고 있었어요. 그의 눈은 침침했고요, 귀는 어두웠으며, 무릎은 부들부들 떨렸어요.
그가 식탁에 앉을 때면, 스푼을 제대로 쥐지도 못해, 묽은 수프를 식탁보에 엎질렀고 입에서도 줄줄 샜지요.
이 바람에 그의 아들과 며느리는 정이 떨어져 노인을 난로 뒤편 구석에 앉히곤 음식도 ‘토기’(진흙을 구워 만든 거) 그릇에 담아 주었어요. 물론 양도 충분히 드리지 않았죠.
노인은 처량한 생각이 들어 식탁을 바라보며 눈물을 흘렸죠.
한번은 역시나 노인이 손을 너무 떨어 그릇을 쥐고 있지 못해 바닥에 떨어뜨리는 바람에 깨지고 말았어요.
젊은 며느리가 그에게 잔소리를 했지만, 노인은 아무 말도 못하고 한숨만 내쉬었답니다.
그래서 그들은 동전 몇 개를 주고 나무 그릇을 하나 사 노인에게 주곤 음식도 거기 담아 드렸어요.
한번은 그들이 앉아 있는데, 네 살배기 어린 손자가 바닥 위에 널브러져 있는 나무 부스러기들을 모어기 시작하는 거예요.
“뭐하니?”라며 아빠가 물었어요.
“작은 ‘여물통’(말이나 소가 밥을 먹는 통)을 만들려고,”라며 아이가 대답했어요. “내가 크면 아빠 엄마를 이걸로 드시게 하려고.”
사내와 아내는 말문이 막혀 잠시 서로를 바라보다 이내 눈물을 쏟고 말았어요.
그런 다음 그들은 나이 드신 아버님을 식탁으로 모셔왔어요, 그 이후로는 쭉 아버님과 함께 식탁에서 식사를 하였답니다. 
물론 아버님이 음식을 좀 엎질러도, 그들은 입도 벙긋하지 않았답니다.

(동화 끝)

동화 「노인과 손자」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「노인과 손자」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter78.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



79. 물의 요정



어린 ‘오누이’(오빠와 여동생)가 한번은 샘 옆에서 놀았지요.
그렇게 놀다 그만 샘에 빠지고 말았어요.
샘 아래는 물의 요정이 살고 있었는데, 요정이 말했어요.
“이제부터 너희들은 내 것이다. 너희들은 나를 위해 부단히 일해야 할 것이다!”
요정이 그들을 데리고 갔어요.
그녀는 어린 여동생에게는 엄청 엉킨 아마(실의 재료)를 주며 실을 만들게 했어요. 여동생은 또한 구멍이 하나 뚫려있는 양동이로 물도 떠와야했어요.
어린 소년은 날이 없는 도끼로 나무를 베어 와야 했어요.
하지만 요정은 어린 오누이가 먹을 거로 가루반죽 푸딩 밖에 주지 않았어요. 그 푸딩은 돌처럼 딱딱했어요.
도저히 참을 수 없던 아이들은 일요일이 오기만을 기다렸어요. 
일요일 요정이 교회에 간 사이 아이들이 달아났어요.
하지만 예배가 끝나고 나오던 요정이 달아나고 있는 아이들을 보곤 아주 성큼성큼 뒤쫓아 왔지 뭐에요. 
그녀가 저 멀리서 뒤쫓아 오는 게 아이들의 눈에 들어왔어요.
소녀가 뒤로 ‘브러시’(=솔=붓?)을 던지자, 브러시가 수만 가지 못이 박힌 뻣뻣한 털들로 곤두선 거대한 언덕 하나로 변했어요.  
요정이 엄청 어려워하며 언덕을 기어오르기 시작하더니 마침내 넘었어요.
아이들이 이것을 보았어요.
그때 소년이 빗을 뒤로 내던졌어요. 그러자 빗이 수만 개의 톱들이 달린 거대한 머리빗 언덕으로 변했어요.
하지만 요정은 이것도 꾸준히 넘기 시작하더니 마침내 넘고 말았어요.
그런 다음 소녀가 거울을 뒤로 내던졌어요. 거울이 거울들이 가득한 언덕으로 변했어요.
이 언덕이 너무도 미끄러워 요정도 차마 이건 오르지 못했어요.
그래서 요정은 생각했어요.
“얼른 집으로 가서 도끼를 가져와 이 거울 언덕을 반으로 쪼개버리자.”
오래지 않아 그녀가 다시 돌아와 거울 언덕을 박살내버렸어요.
그렇지만 아이들은 이미 너무 멀리 도망 가버린 상태였지요.
그리하여 물의 요정도 어쩔 수 없이 자신의 샘으로 발걸음을 돌릴 수밖에 없었답니다. 

(동화 끝)

동화 「물의 요정」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「물의 요정」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter79.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



80. 암탉의 죽음



옛날 옛적에 어린 암탉이 어린 수탉과 함께 호두(나무열매)언덕으로 나들이를 갔어요.
그들은 호두 한 개라도 발견하게 되면 같이 나눠먹기로 약속했죠.
그러다 암탉이 정말 큰, 이따만 한 호두를 한 개 발견했어요. 
두말할 필요도 없이 암탉은 그걸 혼자 다 먹을 작정이었어요.
하지만 호두가 너무 컸기에 한 번에 다 삼켜지지가 않았어요. 목구멍에 걸렸지 뭐예요. 그래서 암탉이 “쾍쾍” 거리며 숨이 막혀 죽기 일보 직전이었어요.
그때 그녀가 소리쳤어요.
“수탉아, 얼른 뛰어가서 물 좀 떠와봐, 안 그럼 나 정말 숨 막혀 죽을 거 같아.”
어린 수탉이 있는 힘껏 샘물로 달려가 말했어요.
“물아, 내게 물 좀 줘. 어린 암탉이 지금 호두 언덕에… 누워 있어, 커다란 호두를 삼키는 바람에 목이 막혀 죽으려고 해.”
샘이 대답했어요.
“우선 ‘신부’(새색시)한테 가 빨간 비단을 좀 받아오려무나.”
어린 수탉이 신부에게 달려가 말했어요.
“새색시님, 제게 빨간 비단을 좀 주세요. 제가 그 빨간 비단을 받아 샘물한테 가면, 샘물이 제게 물을 좀 주겠대요. 그럼 저는 그 물을 지금 호두 언덕 위에 누워 있는 어린 암탉에게 마시게 할 거예요. 그녀가 지금 거대한 호두 한 알을 삼켰다 목이 쾍쾍 하고 있거든요.”
새색시가 대답했어요.
“그러려면 우선 버드나무에 걸려 있는 내 예쁜 ‘화환’(둥글게 만든 꽃들)을 좀 가져다주려무나.”
그래서 어린 수탉이 냉큼 버드나무까지 뛰어가 나뭇가지에서 화환을 잡아당겨 새색시한테 가져다주었어요.
새색시가 그 보답으로 그에게 물을 좀 주었어요.
그런 다음 어린 수탉은 그 물을 들고 암탉에게로 달려갔어요.
하지만 그가 도착해보니 이미 암탉은 그 사이 숨이 막혀 죽은지라 움직이지도 않았어요.
그 바람에 수탉이 너무도 상심해 엄청 큰 소리로 엉엉 울어댔어요.
모든 동물들이 어린 수탉을 애도하기 위해 왔어요.
6마리 생쥐가 암탉을 무덤까지 옮길 예쁘장한 마차를 만들었어요.
마차가 준비되자 생쥐들이 나서서 끌고, 수탉이 운전했어요.
그러다 가는 도중 여우를 만났어요. 
여우가 말했어요.
“어디를 가니, 어린 수탉아?”
“내 어린 암탉을 묻어 주러가는 길이야.”
“그럼 나도 동행해도 되니?”
“응, 하지만 마차 뒷자리에 타렴, 마차 바퀴 앞에 앉음 내 작은 말들(생쥐들)이 끌 수 없잖니.”
그래서 여우가 뒷자리에 가 앉았어요. 그 후 늑대도 타고, 곰도 타고, 수사슴도 타고, 사자도 타고, 숨에 사는 모든 짐승들이 같은 식으로 마차에 올라탔어요.
행렬은 계속되어 그들이 곧 개울가에 도착했어요.
“어떻게 건넌담?”라며 어린 수탉이 말했어요.
개울 옆에 드러누워 있던 ‘지푸라기’(짚의 부스러기) 하나가 말했어요.
“내가 저쪽까지 누워볼 테니까, 너희가 내 위로 마차를 끌고 가렴.”
하지만 여섯 마리 생쥐들이 그 다리(지푸라기)에 발을 디디자말자, 지푸라기가 쑥 꺾이더니 쏙하고 물에 빠져버려, 아무 상관없는 여섯 마리 생쥐들까지 덩달아 물에 빠져 익사하고 말았어요.
그래서 동물들이 어쩔 줄 몰라 하고 있는데, 이번엔 ‘숯’(=석탄)이 오더니 말했어요.
“내가 충분히 크니까, 내가 저쪽까지 누워볼게, 너희는 내 위로 마차를 끌고 지나가렴.”
그리하여 숯이 또한 개울 맞은편까지 드러누웠는데, 아뿔싸 숯은 물에 닿자마자 “쉿쉿” 소리를 내며 불이 꺼지더니 운명하고 말았어요.
이 광경을 지켜보던 돌이 어린 수탉에게 무한 동정심을 느끼고 자신이 나서 도와주겠다고 하면서 물 건너편까지 드러누웠어요.
그래서 수탉은 직접 마차 앞부분을 끌어당기며 돌 위를 밟고 건너가 암탉의 시신을 가까스로 개울 반대쪽 편에 옮길 수 있었어요.
다음으로 수탉이 마차의 나머지 뒷부분까지 다 끌어당겨 뒷좌석에 앉아 있는 동물친구들까지 마저 옮겨주려고 했는데, 아뿔싸 뒷좌석에 동물친구들이 너무 많이 타고 있었던 거예요. 그래서 마차가 뒤로 내달리더니 결국 동물친구들이 모두 물에 빠져 익사하고 말았어요.
이제 어린 수탉은 죽은 암탉과 홀로 남게 되었어요. 
그는 그녀를 위해 무덤을 파내고 안에 그녀를 눕힌 다음 그 위로 흙무덤을 하나 만들어주었어요.
수탉은 그 무덤 위에 앉아 슬퍼하고 또 슬퍼하다 결국 그도 죽고 말았지요.
그리하여 이제 동물친구들 모두가 죽고 말았답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「암탉의 죽음」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「암탉의 죽음」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter80.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



81. 웃기는 친구 루스티히



한번은 큰 전쟁이 벌어졌다 끝이 나자, 수많은 병사들이 일자리를 잃었지요.
그때 우리의 웃기는 친구인 ‘루스티히’(‘루스티히’는 ‘웃기는’ 또는 ‘익살맞은’이라는 뜻의 독일어단어)도 해직되어, 퇴직수당으로 달랑 작은 빵 한 덩어리와 은화 4개만 받고 군대를 나와야 했어요.
루스티히가 가는 길에, ‘성 베드로’(예수님의 제자)가 거지의 모습으로 변해 앉아 있었죠.
루스티히가 오자, 성 베드로가 그에게 구걸을 했어요.
루스티히가 대답했어요.
“거지 씨, 저보고 달라고요? 저는 병사였다 해직돼 가진 거라곤 이 작은 빵 덩어리 하나와 은화 네 개뿐인데요. 이마저 사라지면 저도 당신처럼 구걸을 해야 할 판국이죠. 하지만 그거라도 좀 드리리다.”
그 후 그가 빵을 네 등분으로 나눠 한 등분을 ‘사도’(예수님의 제자)에게 드리고, 은화도 하나 마찬가지로 드렸어요.
성 베드로가 고마워하며 제갈 길을 가셨어요.
그 후 성 베드로께서 다시 병사가 가는 길에 또 다른 거지 차림으로 앉아 계셨어요.
그가 다가오자 사도는 전처럼 한 푼을 구걸하셨지요.
루스티히는 아까 했던 말을 반복하며 다시 자신이 가진 두 번째 빵과 은화 한 개를 드렸지요.
성 베드로가 고맙다고 말하곤 제 갈 길을 가겼어요.
하지만 사도는 세 번째로 또 다른 거지 차림을 하고서 길에 서 있다 루스티히에게 말했어요.
루스티히가 그에게 세 번째 빵과 은화 한 개를 드렸지요.
성 베드로께서 고맙다 말씀하시곤 제 가실 길을 가셨어요.
그리하여 젊은이는 이제 네 번째 빵과 은화 딱 한 개만 남게 되었어요.
여인숙에 도착한 루스티히는 맥주를 은화 한 개만큼 시켜 빵과 함께 먹었어요.
다 먹은 다음 그가 계속 여행을 떠났어요.
그러자 성 베드로께서 이번엔 제대병사로 모습을 바꾸시곤 기다리고 있다 그에게 이렇게 말했어요.
“좋은 날이오 친구, 내게 빵 좀 주시려오, 아님 마실 걸 사게 은화를 주던가?” 
“내가 그걸 어디서 구한다고?”라며 루스티히가 대답했어요. “나도 제대병사라 수중에 빵 하나 은화 하나도 없거든. 오는 길에 거지 세 명을 만나 나눠줬지. 남은 빵과 은화는 여인숙에 들렀을 때 다 써버렸고. 이제 나도 빈털터리니 우리 함께 동냥이나 구하는 수밖에.”
“아니.”라며 성 베드로께서 대답했어요. “가진 게 아주 없진 않소. 내가 의술을 좀 아니 이걸로 도움을 좀 받을 게요.”
“정말인가,”라며 루스티히가 말했어요. “난 그런 건 하나도 모르는데, 먹고 살 일이 걱정이던 찰나에.”
“그럼 나를 따라옴세.”라며 성 베드로가 말했어요. “내가 버는 걸 자네와 반반씩 나눔세.”
“그거 좋지.”라며 루스티히가 말했어요. 
그리하여 그들이 함께 길을 나섰답니다.
그들이 농부의 집을 지나는데, 안에서 대성통곡하는 소리가 들려왔어요.
그래서 그들이 안으로 들어가 보니, 남편은 아파 누워 거의 죽기 일보 직전이고, 그 바로 옆에선 아내가 큰 소리로 목놓아 울고 불고 하고 있었어요.
“울음을 멈추시게,”라며 성 베드로가 말했어요. “내가 그 분을 다시 건겅하게 해드리리다.”
그는 호주머니에서 ‘연고’(바르는 약)를 하나 꺼내더니 환자의 병을 단번에 고쳤어요.
그 바람에 환자가 벌떡 일어나 건강을 회복했죠.
너무나 기쁜 남자와 아내가 말했어요.
“아이고 이를 어찌 보답한담? 뭘 드릴까요?”
하지만 성 베드로께선 아무 것도 바라지 않았어요. 농부 부부가 권하면 권할수록 그는 거절하고 또 거절했지요.
보다 못한 루스티히가 팔꿈치로 그를 슬쩍 찌르며 말했어요.
“받아둬, 준되잖아, 필요할 때가 있을 거야.”
마침내 아내가 새끼 양을 가져다 떠넘기다시피 해서 성 베드로께서도 거절만 할 수 없는 상황이었는데 그래도 안 받으시려하지 뭐예요.
그래서 루스티히가 그의 옆구리를 쿡쿡 찌르며 말했어요.
“받아두라니까, 이 양반 참, 우리가 지금 사양할 땐가!”
그래서 성 베드로께서도 마침내 말했어요.
“그럼, 새끼 양을 받지, 하지만 내가 들진 않겠네, 자네가 받으라고 한 거니 자네가 들게나.”
“상관없네.”라며 루스티히가 말했어요. “그런 거쯤이야.”
그가 어깨에 새끼 양을 둘러맸어요.
그런 다음 그들이 출발해 어느 숲에 도착했어요.
새끼 양이 몹시도 무거워지기 시작한 루스티히가 때마침 배도 고프고 해서 성 베드로에게 말했어요.
“보소, 여기 딱 좋네, 우리 여기서 새끼 양을 요리해 먹지.”
“좋을 대로 하게.”라며 성 베드로가 말했어요. “난 요리를 모르네. 자네가 요리하겠다면야 여기 이 솥을 쓰게나, 그러는 사이 난 잠시 주변을 둘러보고 오겠네. 하지만 내가 돌아올 때까진 먹지 말게나. 곧 옴세.”
“그래그래 잘 다녀옴세.”라며 루스티히가 말했어요. “요리라면 내가 좀 하지.”
성 베드로가 떠난 다음, 루스티히는 새끼 양을 잡아 불을 피운 다음 고기를 솥에 넣고 팔팔 끓였어요.
하지만 새끼 양이 다 익도록 사도 베드로께선 돌아오시지 않았어요.
그래서 루스티히가 솥에서 고기를 꺼내 싹둑 잘라보니 심장이 들어나는 거예요.
“꺅, 이게 제일 맛있는 부분이지.”라며 그가 말하더니 맛만 보려고 한 입 했어요. 그러다 너무 맛나서 심장을 다 먹어치우고 말았죠.
때마침 성 베드로께서 돌아와 말했어요.
“새끼 양 고기를 자네가 다 들게나, 다만 내겐 심장만 주시게.”
루스티히가 칼과 포크를 집더니 짐짓 고기들 사이로 심장을 찾는 척 연기했어요. 
그러더니 심장이 안 보인다는 듯 마침내 그가 퉁명스럽게 말했어요.
“없는데.”
“없다니?”라며 사도께서 말했어요.
“그참,”라며 루스티히가 대답했어요. “보게나, 어디에도 새끼 양 심장은 없군, 그러고 보니 새끼 양에겐 심장이 없다는 걸 우리 둘 다 깜빡했군!”
“어허,”라며 성 베드로가 말했어요. “원 이 사람 별 소리를! 심장 없는 동물이 어디 있나, 새끼 양이 없을 리가 있나?” 
“아닐세, 이보게, 내 확신하네.”라며 루스티히가 말했어요. “새끼 양에겐 심장이 없다네. 곰곰이 기억을 떠올려보시게, 살아오며 새끼 양 심장을 본 적이 있는가.”
“허 참, 그럼 됐네,”라며 성 베드로가 말했어요. “심장이 없다면, 난 새끼 양이 필요 없네. 남은 고기를 자네가 다 먹게나.”
“남으면 이 ‘배낭’(가방)에 넣어가겠네.”라며 루스티히가 말했어요. 
그는 새끼 양을 반을 먹고, 나머지 반을 배낭에 넣었어요.
그들이 계속 여행을 떠났어요.
그때 성 베드로가 그들이 가는 방향에 큰 물길을 내셨어요.
그들은 거길 지나야했지요. 
성 베드로가 말했어요.
“자네가 먼저 건너게.”
“아닐세,”라며 루스티히가 대답했어요. “자네가 먼저 가게.”
그는 생각했어요.
‘이 물길이 얼마나 깊은지 알고 내가 먼저 건너.’
그래서 성 베드로께서 먼저 성큼성큼 들어가셨어요. 물은 그의 무릎까지 차올랐어요.
그래서 루스티히도 마음 놓고 뒤따라가자 물은 점점 깊어지더니 그의 목구멍까지 차올랐어요.
그래서 그가 소리쳤어요.
“아이고, 사람 살려!”
성 베드로께서 말했어요.
“그래 어린 양의 심장을 자네가 먹었다 고백할 텐가?”
“아니,”라며 그가 말했어요. “내가 먹지 않았네.”
그러자 물이 더 깊어져 그의 잎까지 차올랐어요.
“도와주게나, 형씨.”라며 병사(루스티히)가 소리쳤어요.
성 베드로가 말했어요. 
“그래 어린 양의 심장을 자네가 먹었다 고백할 텐가?”
“아니라니까,”라며 그가 대꾸했어요. “내가 먹지 않았네.”
하지만 성 베드로께서 그를 익사시킬 의도가 없으셨기에 물은 점차 가라앉아 그도 빠져나올 수 있었어요.
그들이 계속 더 여행을 시작해 어느 왕국에 도착해보니, 공주님께서 죽을병에 걸려 누워 계시다는 거예요.
“이봐, 형씨!”라며 병사가 성 베드로에게 말했어요. “횡재네. 공주만 고쳐주면 한 평생 먹고 살길이 뚫리는 걸세, 지화자(얼씨구)!”
하지만 그의 기대완 달리 성 베드로께서 걸음속도를 반으로 줄이셨어요.
“자, 빨리 좀 걷게나, 형씨,”라며 그가 말했어요. “시간을 놓침 안 돼.”
하지만 성 베드로는 점점 느리게 걸으셨고, 루스티히는 그를 거의 등 떠밀 듯 하며 도착해보니, 아뿔싸 이미 공주님이 돌아가셨다는 거예요.
“아이고 날 샜군!”라며 루스티히가 말했어요. “자네 느린 걸음걸이 때문이잖은가!”
“조용하게나,”라며 성 베드로가 대답했어요. “난 병자도 치유할 수 있지만, 죽은 자도 다시 살릴 수 있다네.”
“그 잘 됐군,”라며 루스티히가 말했어요. “잘 됐어, 이참에 왕국의 절반은 받아내야겠어.”
그때 그들이 궁전에 도착해서보니 모두가 큰 슬픔에 잠겨 있었지요.
성 베드로가 왕에게 공주를 다시 살려내겠다 말했어요.
그가 공주를 인계받자 말했어요.
“솥에 물을 담아 가져다주시오.”
그것이 운반되어오자, 그가 모두보고 나가달라 명령했어요. 다만 루스티히 한 명만 빼고 말이죠.
그러더니 그는 죽은 아가씨의 사지를 자르더니 솥에 넣고 불을 피워 팔팔 끓였어요.
살점들이 뼈에서 모두 떨어져나가자, 그는 새하얗고 뽀얀 뼈들을 끄집어내 식탁 위에 올려놓으며 본래 순서에 맞게 다시 배열해놓았어요. 
이 작업을 다 마친 후, 그가 한 발짝 다가서며 이렇게 세 번 말했어요.
“거룩한 ‘성부, 성자, 성령’(=하느님)의 이름으로 말하노니, 죽은 여인이여, 일어나라.”
세 번째 말할 때 공주가 생기 있고 팔팔한 예쁜 모습으로 일어났어요.
그러자 왕이 크게 기뻐하며 성 베드로에게 말했어요.
“뭐든 말하게, 심지어 내 왕국의 절반을 달래면 주겠네.”
하지만 성 베드로는 말했어요.
“아무것도 바라지 않습니다.”
‘오 이런 멍텅구리!’라며 루스티히가 속으로 생각했어요. 그러면서 동료의 옆구리를 쿡쿡 찌르며 말했지요. “바보처럼 굴지 말게! 자네는 필요 없을지 몰라도 난 필요하네.”
성 베드로는 한사코 받지 않으려했지만, 다른 한 쪽(루스티히)은 받을 마음이 있어 보임을 그대로 드러내기에 왕이 ‘회계’(=돈 출납) 관리에게 명하여 루스티히의 배당에 금화를 한 가득 담아주게 했어요. 
그런 다음 그들이 다시 여행길에 올라 어느 숲에 도착했어요.
성 베드로가 루스티히에게 말했어요.
“자, 우리 금화를 나눔세.”
“좋지,”라며 그가 대꾸했어요. “그리함세.”
그래서 성 베드로가 금화를 세 등분으로 나누었어요.
루스티히가 속으로 생각했어요.
“이 바보 머릿속엔 뭐가 든 거야? 세 등분으로 나누다니, 사람이라곤 우리 둘 뿐인데!”
그때 성 베드로가 말했어요.
“똑같이 나누었네. 하나는 내 몫이오, 또 하나는 자네 몫, 그리고 하나는 어린 양의 심장을 먹은 자의 몫이네.”
“오, 날세, 내가 먹었네!”라며 루스티히가 황급히 말하며 금화를 주워 담았어요. 내 말을 믿게나.“
“아니 그럴 리가,“라며 성 베드로가 말했어요. ”어린 양들에겐 심장이 없다고 하지 않았나?”
“어, 그야, 뭐 형씨, 왜 그리 생각하는가? 새끼 양이 다른 동물들처럼 심장이 없을 리 없지 않은가, 세상에 심장 없는 짐승이 어디 있는가?”
“음, 그대로 받아들이겠네.”라며 성 베드로가 말했어요. “금화는 자네가 가지게, 하지만 이제 더는 자네와 함께 하지 않겠네. 나는 이제부터 혼자 가겠네.”
“그래 좋을 대로 하게나, 형씨.”라며 루스티히가 대답했어요. “잘 가게.”
그런 다음 성 베드로께서는 다른 길로 가셨어요. 
하지만 루스티히는 생각했어요.
“저런 놈 떼어버리는 게 낫지, 확실히 이상한 놈이었다니까, 별꼴이네 그 참.”
이제 돈도 두둑하겠다, 쓸 일만 남았죠. 하지만 그는 돈을 어떻게 써야하는지를 몰라 금방 돈을 탕진해버렸지요.
얼마 후 그는 또 다시 빈털터리가 되었어요.
그때 어떤 왕국에 도착했는데요, 공주님이 돌아 가셨다는 거예요.
“오 호!”라며 그가 생각했어요. “그 잘 됐군. 한 밑천 다시 챙기겠는 걸, 본대로만 하면 되는 거 아냐.” 
그래서 그가 왕에게 가 죽은 아가씨를 다시 살려보겠노라 말했어요.
때마침 왕도 제대한 어느 병사 하나가 여행하며 죽은 자를 다시 살린다는 소문을 들었던 찰나라 루스티히가 그 남자가 아닌지 생각했지요.
하지만 그에 대한 확신이 안서서 신하들과 먼저 상의를 해보았어요.
신하들은 공주님이 이미 죽었으니 기회를 주어도 될 거 같다고 말했어요.
루스티히 솥에 물을 담아가져다 달라고 말했어요, 그리곤 모두 나가있게 했지요.
그가 사지를 잘라 솥에 넣고 불을 피웠어요. 성 베드로가 하던 대로 그대로 말이죠.
물이 팔팔 끓기 시작하고 살점들이 떨어져나가자 그가 뼈들을 끄집어내 식탁 위에 올려놓았어요.
하지만 그는 정확한 순서를 몰라 순서를 제각각 놓으며 뼈들을 배열했어요.
그런 다음 그가 뼈들 앞에 서서 말했어요.
“거룩한 ‘성부, 성자, 성령’(=하느님)의 이름으로 명하노니, 죽은 여인이여, 일어나라.”
그는 이 말을 세 번 반복했어요.
하지만 아무 일도 일어나지 않았어요.
“여인이어 일어나라, 일어나!”라며 그가 소리쳤어요. “일어나오, 안 그럼 안 좋을 줄 알아요!”
그가 이렇게 쩔쩔매고 있을 때, 성 베드로께서 이전 제대병사의 모습을 하고서 불쑥 나타 나섰어요.
그가 창문으로 들어오시며 말했어요.
“가련한 자여, 이 무슨 해괴한 짓인가? 죽은 여인을 살려보겠다고 뼈들 앞에서 그런 말을 하다니?”
“이봐요, 형씨, 나도 한다고 했다고요.”라며 루스티히가 대답했어요. 
“이번 한 번만은 내가 자네 사정이 딱해 도와줌세. 하지만 내 분명 이르는데, 다신 이러지 말게, 안 그럼 자네에게 안 좋을 줄 알게나. 또한 이 일로 왕께 아무리 사소한 보답도 요구해선 안 되네!”
그 후 즉시 성 베드로께서 뼈들을 제 순서대로 배열하시고 그 처녀에게 세 번 이렇게 말했어요.
“거룩한 ‘성부, 성자, 성령’(=하느님)의 이름으로 말하노니, 죽은 여인이여, 일어나라.”
공주님이 건강하고 아름다운 예전 모습으로 일어나섰어요.
그러자 성 베드로가 다시 창문을 통해 사라졌어요.
모든 게 뜻대로 되자 루스티히는 뛸 듯이 기뻤어요. 그런데 이 일로 아무런 보답을 요구하지 말아야한다는 것에 짜쯩이 만땅 났지요.
“정말 별꼴이라니까,”라며 그가 생각했어요. “저 친구 머릿속엔 무슨 뚱딴지만 들었기에, 이런 도움을 주고도 땡전 한 닢 받지 말라 그러지!”
그때 왕이 루스티히에게 뭐든 바라는 게 있음 말하라고 제안했어요.
하지만 그는 감히 바랄 수 없었죠.
그래서 재주껏 암시해 가며 왕이 그의 배낭 속에 금화를 가득 채우게 했어요.
그 금화를 메고서 그가 길을 떠났답니다.
그가 성문을 나서자마자, 성 베드로께서 성문 옆에 서 있다 말했어요.
“어쩌자고 이런 겐가, 내 분명 아무 것도 바라지 말라 금하지 않았는가, 그런데도 자네 배낭 속에 가득 든 금화들은 또 뭔가!”
“남사(남이사),”라며 루스티히가 말했어요. “아니 넣어주는 걸 낸들 어쩝니까?”
“그렇담, 내 이번에 분명 말해두는데, 다신 이와 같은 일을 벌이지 말게나!”
“허참, 이보쇼 형씨, 이제 나도 돈이 있는데, 내가 왜 그딴 뼈들 때문에 곤란함을 자처한단 말이오?”
“참말로,”라며 성 베드로가 말했어요. “그 금화가 오래도 가겠다! 자네가 금지된 길로 다시 들지 않게 내 자네 배낭에 풍요로움을 부여해주겠네. 소위 말해 자네가 바르는 건 뭐든 그 안에 들어가 있을 걸세. 그럼 잘 가게, 이제 나와 두 번 다시 만날 일은 없을 걸세.”
“잘 가소,”라며 루스티히가 말하며 혼자서 생각했어요. ‘이제야 저 인간에게서 벗어났군, 참 그 생각하면 할수록 별난 인간일세. 제발 나 좀 따라오지 마소.’
하지만 그는 성 베드로께서 자신의 배낭에 부여해주신 신비로운 힘에 대해선 두 번 다시 생각하지 않았지요. 까먹었거든요.
루스티히는 돈으로 세상을 이리저리 여행하고 다녔어요. 하지만 버릇이 어디가나요, 또 금방 돈을 다 탕진해버렸답니다.
그러다 결국 은화 딱 네 개 밖에 남지 않게 되었지요. 
그가 어느 여인숙에 들렀을 때 생각했지요.
‘못 먹어도 고다.’
그래서 그가 은화 세 개짜리 포도주를 시키고, 은화 한 개짜리 빵도 시켰어요.
그가 마시며 앉아 있는데, 어디선가 코를 자극하는 구수한 거위고기 냄새가 나는 거예요.
루스티히가 주변을 힐끔힐끔 둘러보니 주인장이 오븐에 거위 두 마리를 굽고 있었어요.
그제야 그는 자신의 동료가 말한, 무엇을 바라든 배낭 속에 들어갈 거라 말한 그 말을 기억해내곤 말했어요.
“오 호! 오늘은 저 거위 고기로 배 채우게 생겼네.”
그래서 그는 문 밖에 나온 다음 이렇게 말했어요.
“나는 오븐 속에 있던 구운 거위 두 마리가 내 배낭 속에 들어가길 원해.”
그 말을 한 다음 배낭을 열어보니 정말 그게 안에 들어 있었어요.
“아, 재수!”라며 그가 말했어요. “난 이제 부자다!”
그가 풀밭으로 가 거위 고기를 꺼냈어요.
그가 한 참 식사 중일 때, 두(=2) 일꾼이 오더니 아직 손대지 않은 두 번째 거위고기를 바라보며 입맛을 쩍쩍 다셨어요. 
루스티히가 속으로 생각했어요.
“그래 나는 하나면 족해.”
그래서 그가 두 사람을 불러 말했어요.
“이 거위 고기를 가져가 마음껏 드세요.”
그들이 고마워하며 그걸 가지고 그 여인숙으로 갔어요. 그들은 포도주 반병과 빵 하나를 시키더니, 가져간 그 거위 고기를 꺼내 먹기 시작했어요.
안주인이 이 모습을 보고 남편에게 말했어요.
“어머나, 저 두 사람이 거위 고기를 먹고 있잖아요, 오븐에 둔 우리 거위 고기들이 이상 없나 보시구려.”
주인장이 달려가 오븐 속을 들여다보니 텅텅 비워있지 뭐예요!
“옳거니!”라며 그가 소리쳤어요. “이 도둑놈들을 봤나. 어디서 감히 거위 고기를 공짜로 먹으려고 들어? 당장 돈을 내지 못해, 안 그럼 비오는 날 먼지 나도록 때려줄 테니까.”
두 사람이 말했어요.
“저희들은 도둑들이 아닙니다. 풀밭에 있던 제대병상한테서 이 거위 고기를 받았다고요,”
“흥, 어디서 내 눈을 속이려고! 그 병사는 여기 있다 그냥 얌전히 간 사람이야, 순진한 친구였다고. 내가 보기에, 도둑은 너희들이야 어디 맛 좀 봐라, 이놈들!”  
두 일꾼이 돈을 지불 못하자, 여인숙 주인장은 몽둥이를 집어 들더니 그들을 끝짱 나게 두들겨 패곤 집밖으로 내쫓아버렸어요.
한편 루스티히는 계속 자기 길을 가 웅장한 성이 하나 서 있는 곳까지 다다르게 되었어요.
그 성에서 그리 멀지 않은 곳에 허름한 여인숙이 하나 있었어요.
그가 그 여인숙으로 들어가 하룻밤 묵어갈 수 있나 물었어요.
하지만 주인장은 그냥 가라는 거예요.
주인장이 말했지요.
“여긴 방이 없어요. 귀한 손님들이 다 차서.”
“아니 그런 분들이 저 웅장한 성으로 안 가고 왜 당신 집에서 묵는단 말인가요.”라며 루스티히가 말했어요.
“아, 그건,”라며 주인장이 대꾸했어요. “거기서 하룻밤을 묵는 거야 자유지만, 그걸 지금까지 시도했던 사람치고 살아서 기어 나온 사람이 한 명도 없었으니 문제지요.”
“다른 사람들이 해봤다면,”라며 루스티히가 말했어요. “나도 한 번 해보리다.”
“관두세요.”라며 주인장이 말했어요. “그러다 진짜 목이 날아가요.”
“사람이 한 번 죽지 두 번 죽남.”라며 루스티히가 말했어요. “어서 열쇠나 주소, 먹을 음식과 포도주도 좀 주시고.”
그리하여 주인장이 열쇠와 음식과 그리고 포도주를 챙겨주자, 그걸 쥐고서 루스티히는 성으로 들어가, 일단 저녁식사를 배부르게 한 다음, 잠이 와 바닥위에 드러누웠답니다. 왜냐면 거긴 침대가 없었거든요.
그가 곧 쿨쿨 잘도 잤어요. 밤사이 큰 소란이 벌어져 그가 문득 깨어나 보니, 엄청 추하게 생긴 악마 아홉 명이 그를 주위로 원을 그리며 춤을 추고 있는 거예요.
루스티히가 말했어요.
“얼씨구, 너희들이 춤추는 거야 뭐라 안하겠는데, 너무 내 가까이로만 다가오지마라.”
하지만 악마들은 흥에 겨워 계속 그에게 가까워졌고 그들의 소름끼치는 발들에 루스티히의 얼굴이 거의 밟히기 일보직전이었어요.
“멈춰, 이 허깨비 악마들아,”라며 그가 말했어요. 
하지만 상황은 더 심해져 악마들이 더 심하게 춤을 추었어요.
화가 머리끝까지 난 루스티히가 소리쳤어요.
“오라! 그렇담 내가 직접 조용히 시켜주마.” 그러더니 그가 의자 다리 하나를 부수더니 악마들 사이로 달려들어 마구 쳐댔어요.
하지만 병사 하나가 상대하기엔 악마 아홉은 너무 많았어요.
그가 앞에 있는 악마를 치면, 다른 악마가 그의 뒤에서 머리카락을 붙잡곤 인정사정없이 뜯어댔어요.
“이 망할 놈의 악마 놈들 때문에,”라며 그가 소리쳤어요. “상황이 더 나빠지네. 그렇담 기다려봐, 나도 다 방법이 있으니까. 너희 아홉 명 모두 내 배낭 속으로!”
그 즉시 악마들이 배낭으로 들어가 버리고 말았어요. 
그가 즉시 배낭을 단단히 졸라맨 다음 구석에다 던져버렸어요.
그 후엔 모든 게 조용해졌어요.
루스티히는 다시 자리에 드러누운 다음 날이 밝을 때까지 쿨쿨 잘 잤답니다.
다음날 여인숙 주인장이 오고, 성의 소유자인 귀족도 루스티히가 어찌되었나 보러 달려왔지요. 
그가 멀쩡한 것을 본 그들은 깜짝 놀라하며 물었어요.
“유령들에게 해코지라도 안 당하셨어요?”
“그럴 수밖에요,”라며 루스티히가 대답했어요. “제가 그들 아홉 모두를 배낭 속에 집어넣어버렸거든요! 이제 당신의 성이 평안해졌으니 다시 사셔도 될 겁니다. 그들 아홉이 다시 출몰하는 일은 없을 테니까요.”
그 귀족이 루스티히에게 거듭 감사의 인사를 하며 큰 선물들을 주면서 자기 밑에서 봉사해 달라 간청했어요. 그가 살아있는 동안 여생을 책임져주겠다면서요.
“아닙니다,”라며 루스티히가 대꾸했어요. “저는 방랑(떠돌아다님)이 익숙합니다. 더 여행을 다녀보려고요.”
그런 다음 그는 배낭을 메고 나와 ‘대장장이의 일터’로 가 ‘모루’(쇠 받침대)위에 아홉 악마들이 든 배낭을 올려놓으며 대장장이에게 사정없이 이 배낭을 두드려 달라 요구했어요.
그리하여 악마들은 대장장이의 온 힘을 다한 해머 질 공격을 받고 아우성을 쳐댔어요.
그 후 그가 다시 배낭을 열어보니 그들 중 여덟은 이미 죽었고, 딱 한 명만이 배낭의 주름 속에 들어있다 살아남았어요. 그 악마가 튀어나오더니 지옥으로 다시 줄행랑을 쳐버렸어요.
그래서 루스티히는 오랫동안 세상 여기저기를 여행하며 다녔어요. 그에 대한 많은 일화들이 전해져 내려오죠.  
하지만 결국 그도 늙게 되어 마지막을 생각하게 되어, 신앙심이 깊은 사람으로 알려진 ‘은자’(세상을 벗어나 숨어 지내는 사람) 한 명을 찾아가 이렇게 말했어요.
“이제 떠돌아다니는 삶에도 지쳤습니다. 그래서 지금은 천국에 들어갈 수 있는 그런 행동을 하고 싶습니다.”
은자가 대꾸했어요.
“세상엔 두 가지 길이 있습니다. 하나는 넓고 편안하지만 지옥으로 이르는 길이 되며, 다른 하나는 좁고 거칠지만 천국으로 이어집니다.”
‘내가 바보가 아니고서야,’라며 루스티히가 생각했어요. ‘내가 왜 좁고 거친 길(천국으로 가는 길)을 가.’
그래서 그는 길을 떠나 넓고 편안한 길을 선택해 살았고 결국엔 커다란 검은 문에 도착했어요. 그 문이 바로 지옥의 문이었지요.
루스티히가 똑똑 노크를 하자, 문지기가 누가 와 있는지 보려고 밖을 엿봤어요.
하지만 그가 루스티히를 보자마자 기겁을 하고 말았어요. 왜냐면 그는 루스티히의 배낭 속에 들어 있다 죽도록 두들겨 맞는 바람에 시퍼렇게 피멍이 든 채 달아나야했던 바로 그 악마였거든요.
그 악마가 최고로 재빨리 문의 빗장을 다시 걸어 잠그곤, 악마 상관(윗사람. 원문→중위)에게 달려가 말했어요.
“지금 저 밖에서 배낭을 메고 여길 들어오겠다고 하고 있는 자를 절대 들이서는 안 됩니다. 안 그랬다간 저 놈이 지옥 전부를 자기 배낭 속에 넣게다 소망하고 말 테니까요. 제가 배낭 안에 들어갔다 끔찍한 해머 질을 당했다는 놈이 바로 저 놈입니다요.”
그래서 그들이 루스티히보고 “당장 꺼져! 너를 절대 여기에 들일 순 없어.”라며 생 고함을 질러댔어요.
‘그들이 나를 안들이겠다면야,’라며 루스티히가 생각했어요. ‘나도 어딘 가엔 들어가야 하니, 천국으로 가는 길을 선택하는 수밖에.’
그리하여 그가 방향을 돌려 천국의 문에 도착할 때까지 계속해서 걷고 또 걸었어요.
그가 천국의 문에 도착해 노크를 했어요.
성 베드로가 때마침 문지기로 앉아 있었지요.
루스티히는 단번에 그를 알아보고 생각했어요.
‘여기 내 오랜 친구가 있군. 잘 되겠군.’
하지만 성 베드로가 말했어요.
“천국에 들어오길 진실로 바라느냐.”
“나를 들여보내주쇼, 형씨. 나도 어딘 가엔 있어야 하지 않겠소. 지옥에 갔더니 나를 들일 수 없다 하지 않겠소.”
“안 된다,”라며 성 베드로가 말했어요. “너는 여기 들어올 수 없노라.”
“나를 들일 수 없담, 이 배낭만이라도 다시 가져가시구려, 나도 이제 더는 당신한테 바라는 게 없으니까.”
“그럼, 여기 주거라.”라며 성 베드로가 말했어요.
루스티히는 배낭을 문 창문을 통해 배낭을 돌려주었어요.
성 베드로가 그것을 건네받아 자신의 의자 앉는 부분 옆에 걸어두었어요.
그러자 루스티히가 말했어요.
“이제 나는 내 배낭 속에 들어가길 소망하노라.”
그리하여 순식간에 그는 배낭 속에 들어갔고, 그 바람에 그도 천국에 들어가게 되었지요.
이리하여 성 베드로로서도 그를 천국에 머물게 허락하는 수밖에 달리 방법이 없었답니다.

 
(동화 끝)

동화 「웃기는 친구 루스티히」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「웃기는 친구 루스티히」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter81.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



82. 노름꾼 헨젤



옛날 옛적에 정말이지 노름만 하는 남자가 있었어요. 
그래서 모두들 그를 노름꾼 ‘헨젤’(남자이름)이라고 불렀지요. 
그가 그렇게 노름만 하다 보니, 집과 가진 모든 것을 노름으로 날리게 되었지요.
이제 빚쟁이들이 그에게서 집을 가져가기로 한 바로 전날, 하느님과 성 베드로가 오셔서, 하룻밤 묵게 해줄 수 있느냐고 물으셨어요.
그때 노름꾼 헨젤이 말했어요.
“여러분을 묵게 해주는 건 제가 어찌 해볼 수 있으나, 드릴 침대도 먹을 음식도 드릴 수 없는 걸요.”
그래서 하느님께서 말씀하시길, 묵게만 해주면 먹을 건 우리가 마련하겠다, 라고 말씀하셨지요. 그래서 노름꾼 헨젤도 더는 마다하지 않았어요.
 그런 까닭에 성 베드로께서 동전 세 개를 주시며 빵가게에 가서 빵을 몇 개 사오라 말씀하셨지요.
그래서 노름꾼 헨젤이 룰루랄라 뛰어가다, 때마침 다른 노름꾼 깡패들이 한데 모여 있던 집을 지나게 되었어요. 그 깡패들은 헨젤에게서 돈을 몽땅 딴 나쁜 사람들이었어요. 그들이 헨젤에게 떠뜰썩하게 인사를 하며 말했어요.
“헨젤, 들어오게.”
“오,”라며 그가 말했어요. “이 동전 세 개도 따갈려고?”
그 말에 깡패들이 그를 그냥 가게 내버려두지 않았어요.
그리하여 그는 들어갔고 동전 세 개로 또 노름을 했지요.
한편 하느님과 성 베드로는 아무리 기다려도 그가 돌아오지 않자 마중을 나가보았어요.
하지만 노름꾼 헨젤은 도착해선, 마치 자신이 그 돈이 썩은 물웅덩이에 떨어진 양 연기하며 갈퀴로 여기저기 뒤지고 있었어요.  
하지만 하느님은 그가 노름으로 다 날렸음을 이미 아시고 계셨어요.
성 베드로가 다시 동전 세 개를 주었어요.
이번엔 그도 정신 똑바로 차리고 심부름을 완수해 빵 덩어리를 그들에게 가져다드렸어요.
하느님이 포도주가 없느냐고 물으시자, 그가 말하길,
“슬프네요, 사실 포도주 통들이 싹 다 텅 비었거든요!”
하지만 하느님께서는, 지하 포도주 저장실로 가보라 하셨어요, 왜냐면 거기에 최고급 포도주가 아직 있을 거라 말씀하셨거든요.
한동안 그가 이 말을 믿지 않다 결국 말했어요.
“참내 원, 내려는 가보겠지만 정말 아무 것도 없다니까 그러시네요.”
하지만 그가 통의 꼭지를 돌렸을 때, 보라, 최고급 포도주가 콸콸 흘러나오지 않던가!
그래서 그가 그걸 담아다 그들에게 가져다드렸지요.
그리하여 두 분은 거기서 하룻밤을 푹 주무셨어요.
다음날 일찍 하느님이 노름꾼 헨젤을 부르시어, 세 가지 소원을 말해보라, 말씀하셨어요.  
하느님은 그가 천국에 가게 해달라 요청할 거라 짐짓 기대하셨지요.
하지만 노름꾼 헨젤은 무조건 이기는 ‘카드 한 벌’과, 무조건 이기는 ‘주사위’와, 모든 종류의 열매가 자라지만 자신이 상대방보고 내려오라 하기 전엔 결코 올라간 나무에서 아무도 내려올 수 없는 나무를 빌었어요.
하느님께서 그가 소원한 모든 걸 주시곤 성 베드로와 함께 출발하셨어요.
이제 노름꾼 헨젤은 열렬히 노름에만 파고들었고, 거는 족족 따, 결국엔 세상의 절반을 거머쥐게 되었어요.
보다 못한 성 베드로가 하느님께 말했어요.
“하느님, 이러다 세상이 절단 나겠습니다. 그는 따고, 하느님은 잃으시니, 이제 온 세상이 그에게 넘어갈 판입니다. 아무래도 저승사자를 보내야겠습니다요.”
저승사자가 왔을 때, 노름꾼 헨젤은 도박 테이블에 앉아 노름을 하고 있었어요.
저승사자가 말했어요.
“헨젤, 잠시 좀 나와 보게나.”
하지만 노름꾼 헨젤은 말했어요.
“판이 끝날 때까지 잠시만 기다려주세요, 그 사이 저 밖에 있는 나무에 올라가서 우리가 가는 길에 먹을 탐스런 과일을 좀 따고 계시구려.”
그런 까닭에 저승사자가 나무에 올라갔다가 다시 내려오질 못했어요.
그렇게 노름꾼 헨젤은 저승사자를 거기 나무 위에 7년 동안이나 머물게 했지요. 이 기간 동안 세상에선 아무도 죽지 않았답니다.
보다 못한 성 베드로가 다시 하느님께 말씀드렸어요.
“하느님, 이러다 정말 세상이 절단 나겠습니다. 사람들이 더는 아무도 죽지 않으니, 저희라도 가봐야 하는 게 아닌지요.”
그리하여 그들이 몸소 헨젤의 집에 납시었어요.
하느님이 헨젤에게 저승사자를 내려오게 하라 명하셨어요.
그 즉시 헨젤이 밖으로 나가 저승사자에게 말했어요.
“내려오세요.”
저승사자는 즉시 그를 붙잡았고 그리하여 헨젤은 죽고 말았답니다.
그들이 함께 길을 떠나 ‘다음 세상’(내세)에 도착했어요.
그때 노름꾼 헨젤이 곧장 천국의 문으로 가 노크를 했지요.
“거기 누구요?”
“노름꾼 헨젤입니다요.”
“아, 여긴 자네와는 전혀 상관이 없다네! 물러가시게!”
그래서 그가 이번엔 ‘연옥’(착하지만 세례를 못 받아 천국에 못 간 사람들이 머무는 곳)에 가 다시 한 번 노크를 했어요.
“거기 누구세요?”
“노름꾼 헨젤입니다.”
“아, 그(노름꾼 헨젤) 없이도 여긴 눈물과 흐느낌이 마를 날이 없답니다. 우린 노름을 바라지 않으니, 이만 가 주세요.”
그런 다음 그가 이번엔 지옥의 문으로 가니 거기선 그를 안으로 들여보내주었어요.
하지만 거기엔 늙은 마왕과 늙어 허리가 꼬부라진 악마들뿐이었지요. 왜냐면 지옥의 악마들은 죄다 세상으로 나가 일을 하고 있었거든요.
헨젤은 거기 도착하자마자 노름을 다시 시작했어요.
하지만 마왕이 걸 거라곤 늙어 허리가 꼬부라진 악마들뿐이었지요.
그걸 노름꾼 헨젤이 단번에 다 버렸어요. 하긴 절대지지 않는 카드로 게임을 하니 잃을 수가 없었지요.
그건 그렇고 헨젤은 늙어 허리가 꼬부라진 악마들을 데리고서 다시 길을 떠나 산으로 가 ‘홉 덩굴’(덩굴풀. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/TNUVoa ) 받침대 하나를 뽑아가지고 천국으로 가 받침대를 조각내 마구 던지기 시작했어요. 그 바람에 천국이 막 부스지고 난리였어요.
그래서 성 베드로가 다시 말했어요.
“하느님, 이러다 끝장나겠습니다. 아무래도 그를 들여야 할 거 같습니다. 안 그랬다간 저희가 천국에서 쫓겨날 판입니다.”
그래서 그들이 그를 받아들였지요.
하지만 노름꾼 헨젤은 천국에 들어오자마자 즉시 노름을 다시 시작했고 한 바탕 큰 소음과 소동을 벌였어요. 그래서 천국 사람들은 서로 말하는 소리도 안 들릴 정도였어요.
그런 까닭에 성 베드로가 다시 한 번 말했어요.
“하느님, 이리 더는 못 살겠습니다. 저희가 그를 아래로 내던져야겠습니다. 안 그랬다간 그는 우리 천국의 ‘철천지한’(사무치는) 골칫덩어리가 되고 말겠습니다.”
그래서 그들이 즉시 노름꾼 헨젤에게 가 그를 아래로 내던졌어요.
그 바람에 노름꾼 헨젤의 영혼은 산산조각 부서져, 바로 오늘을 살고 있는 모든 노름꾼들에게로 스며들었답니다.  
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「노름꾼 헨젤」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「노름꾼 헨젤」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter82.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



83. 운 좋은 한스



한스(남자이름. ‘독일사람’이란 뜻)가 7년 동안 자신의 주인을 섬기다 말했어요.
“주인님, 이제 기한도 다 되었으니 그만 엄마가 계시는 고향집으로 돌아가 볼까하니 그동안의 임금을 주세요.”
주인이 대답했어요.
“그래 넌 참 부지런히 나를 위해 일해 주었지. 내 그에 합당한 보수를 두둑이 주마.”
그는 한스에게 한스의 머리통만한 금덩어리를 하나 주었어요.
한스가 호주머니에서 손수건을 꺼내 덩어리를 감싼 다음 어깨에 짊어 메고 고향집으로 출발했어요.
그렇게 한 발 디디고 또 한 발 디디며 가고 있는데, 기사(말 탄 사람) 한 명이 생기넘치는 말을 타고 빠르고 흥겹게 총총걸음으로 오는 게 보였어요.
“아!”라며 한스가 탄식을 하며 말했어요. “말을 탄다는 게 정말 기똥차군! 의자에 떡하니 앉아 돌부리에 걸릴 염려도 없고 신발이 축나지도 않고 그냥 타고 가기만하면 되잖아. 당신 참 부럽소.”
이 말을 들은 기사가 멈추더니 불렀어요.
“이보게! 한스, 그런데, 자넨 왜 걸어 다니나?”
“그럴 수밖에요,”라며 그가 대답했어요. “이 덩어리를 고향집까지 들고 가야하거든요. 사실 이건 금인데, 머리에 이고 갈 수도 없고, 정말 어깨 아파 죽겠네요.”
“그럼 말을 하지 그랬나,”라며 기사가 말했어요. “우리 맞교환하지. 내 자네에게 내 말을 주겠네, 자넨 그 덩어리를 내게 주게나.”
“사랑합니다, 기사님.”라며 한스가 말했어요. “제가 드릴 수 있는 말씀은, 이제 당신은 이 덩어리 때문에 네 발로 기어가게 생기셨다는 거예요.”
기사가 말에서 내리더니 금덩어리를 받곤 한스가 말을 타는 걸 도와주었어요.
그런 다음 기사는 말고삐를 한스의 손에 단단히 쥐어주며 말했어요.
“속도를 내고 싶음, 자네 혀를 차며 ‘쯧! 쯧!’라고 소리치게나.” 
한스는 말을 앉아 탁 터인 도로를 가니 기분이 아주 좋았어요.
잠시 후 이대로라면 좀 더 속도를 내 봐도 될 거 같지 뭐예요, 그래서 그가 자신의 혀를 차며 “쯧! 쯧1”라고 소리쳤어요.
말이 속도를 내며 달리기 시작했어요.
그러다 한스가 어딘지 깨닫기도 전에 말에서 떨어져, 도로와 밭 사이의 도랑 속에 곤두박질치고 말았죠.
만약 때마침 젖소를 끌고 함께 가던 농부가 말을 붙들어주지 않았다면 말은 정도 달아나버렸을 거예요.
한스가 팔 다리를 다시 움직여 일어섰어요. 그런데 짜증이 왕창 밀려들어 농부에게 말했지요.
“젠장, 이런 빌어먹을 말을 타고 가다간 어느 순간에 내동댕이쳐져 목뼈가 뿌려질지 모르겠네. 내가 다시는 타나 봐라. 난 이제 당신 젖소가 마음에 드오. 그간 뒤에서 조용히 걷기만 하면, 우유나 버터나 치즈가 매일 같이 나오지 않소. 내가 그런 젖소의 주인이라면 억만금을 준대도 안 바꾸리다.”
“그렇담,”라며 농부가 말했어요. “내 당신에게 그 억만금을 주리다. 어떻소, 젖소와 말을 바꾸지 않겠소.”
한스가 이 뜻밖의 횡재에 바로 동의했어요.
농부는 말에 올라타더니 재빨리 사라졌어요.
한스는 젖소를 앞에 몰고 차분히 걸었어요. 
그러면서 생각했지요. 
‘참말로 이런 운 좋은 거래가 있나. 이젠 뭐 빵만 있음 다 되는 거 아냐… 내가 원할 때면 언제든 버터와 치즈를 먹을 수 있고, 목마를 땐 젖소에게 우유를 짜 먹으면 되지. 진심, 이보다 더 무엇을 바라겠어?“ 
그는 휴식을 취하기 위해 어느 여인숙에 들어갔어요.
그리곤 점심과 저녁으로 가지고 간 많은 음식을, 수중에 있던 동전 몇 개까지 탈탈 털어 맥주 반잔을 주문해 몽땅 다 먹어치워 버렸어요.
그런 다음 젖소를 몰고 엄마가 계신 마을로 가는 길을 따라 나아갔어요. 
정오(낮 12시)가 가까워짐에 따라 뙤약볕이 점점 더 심해지더니 거의 한 시간을 걸었는데도 자신이 아직도 황무지에 있는 거예요.
너무 덥고 혀가 타들어갈 정도로 목이 마른 한스가 생각했어요.
‘그 잘 됐네. 지금 젖소에게서 우유를 짜 목 좀 축여야겠다.“
그가 젖소를 마른 나무에 묶었어요. 마침 통이 없어 자신의 가죽 모자를 아래에 받쳤어요. 하지만 아무리 짜도 우유 한 방울 나오지 않는 거예요.
게다가 그가 아주 서툴게 우유를 짜는 바람에 성질이 난 짐승이 마침내 참지 못하고 한스의 머리통을 자신의 뒷발로 걷어차 버리기까지 했답니다.
한스가 땅바닥 위에 쓰러져 있었어요. 한참을 그렇게 누워있다 보니 이게 지금 이 세상인지 저 세상인지조차 분간이 안갈 정도였지요.
때마침 운이 좋게도 정육점 주인이 새끼 돼지를 실은 ’외바퀴 손수레‘ 하나를 끌고 지나가다 쓰러져 있는 한스를 발견하곤 달려와 일으켜주며 말했어요.
“아니 이보게 이 무슨 변고인가?”
한스가 자초지종을 말해주었어요.
정육점 주인이 그에게 자신의 휴대용 물병을 건네주며 말했어요.
“우선 이거로라도 한 모금 목을 축이게나. 이 젖소로는 우유를 짤 수 없을 거네, 너무 늙었지 않은가. 기껏해야 밭을 갈거나 아님 정육점에 팔릴 테지.”
“이거, 원,”라며 한스가 자신의 머리카락을 뒤로 쓸어 넘기며 말했어요. “누가 그 생각이나 했겠어요? 이젠 뭐 집에 고이 모시고가 잡아먹으면 다 겠구먼! 난 고기에 즙이 많이 없어 젖소고기를 그다지 좋아하지도 않는데, 고기라면 저런 새끼 돼지가 일품이지, 맛이 차원이 다르지, 게다가 소시지도 만들 수 있고 말이오!”
“이보게, 한스,”라며 정육점 주인이 말했어요. “내 자네에게 선심 쓰는 척하고 바꿔줌세. 이 젖소와 저 돼지를 바꾸세.”
“이렇게 친절하실 수가 아저씬 분명 천국에 가실 겁니다!”라며 한스가 젖소를 포기한다 말하자, 정육점 주인은 자신의 손수레에서 돼지를 묶고 있던 끈을 풀어 한스의 손에 쥐어주었어요.
한스가 가면서 오늘따라 어찌 이리도 자신이 소망하는 대로만 일들이 이루어지는지 기가 막히다고 생각했어요. 고민거리가 생기면 즉시 풀리니 말이에요.
이내 곧 그는 품에 새하얀 멋진 거위 한 마리를 안고 가는 어느 젊은이 한 명과 합류하게 되었어요.
그들이 서로 인사를 건넨 후, 한스는 자신의 운빨 날리는 오늘에 대해 얘기를 들려주었지요. 거래하는 족족 대박을 터뜨렸다면서요.
그 청년은 지금 세례식 만찬 때 이 거위를 먹을 거라 했어요.
“좀 들어보세요,”라며 청년이 거위 한 쪽 붙들며 말했어요. “제법 무겁답니다… 지난 8주를 배부르게 먹였거든요. 누구든 이 거위고기를 한 입 무는 사람은 입 양 옆으로 두둑이 물리는 고기 살에 기가 막힐 겁니다.”
“그렇군요,”라며 한스가 한 손으로 거위의 무게를 재보며 말했어요. “제법 나가는 군요. 그래도 내 돼지만 할까.”
그 사이 청년이 길 이쪽 저 쪽을 의심스레 살펴보며 고개를 왔다 갔다 했어요.
“이걸 보세요,”라며 청년이 마침내 입을 열었어요. “당신 돼지는 정당한 돼지가 아니에요. 제가 방금 지나온 마을에 일이 났더군요. 글쎄 시장님 네 돼지가 도둑맞았다는 거예요. 제 생각엔… 아무래도 당신이 데리고 있는 저 돼지가 그 돼지 같습니다. 그들이 사람을 풀어났으니 이제 돼지 때문에 붙들리는 건 일도 아니에요. 열에 아홉은 깜깜한 지하 감옥에 갇히고 말겠지요.” 
착한 한스가 화들짝 놀랐어요.
“세상에!”라며 그가 말했어요. “나 좀 도와주시게. 당신은 이곳 지리를 나보다 더 잘 알 테니, 이 돼지를 받고 그 거위를 내게 주고 가게나.”
“그들이 가만히 있진 않을 텐데,”라며 청년이 대답했어요. “하지만 당신이 곤란함에 처하는 것도 두고 볼 순 없지요.”
그러면서 그는 끈을 건네받곤 유유히 샛길을 통해 돼지를 데리고 재빨리 사라졌어요.
근심을 든 착한 한스는 품에 거위를 안고 고향집으로 향했어요.
“거참 생각할수록 기똥차네,”라며 그가 혼자 생각했지요. “이번엔 정말 잘 바꾼 거 같아. 우선 좋은 거위고기를 얻을 수 있고, 뚝뚝 떨어질 기름의 양에다가, 3개월 동안은 그 기름을 빵에다 떨어뜨려 먹을 수 있잖아, 마지막으로 아름다운 이 흰색 깃털 좀 봐. 이걸 내 베개에다 가득 채우면 정말 뒤척이지 않고 꿀잠을 잘 수 있잖아. 엄마가 참 좋아하시겠다!”
그가 마지막 마을을 지나가는데, 손수레에 가위 가는 맷돌을 실은 한 사람이 맷돌을 윙윙 돌리며 노래를 부르고 있었어요…
“가위 갈아요, 맷돌로 갈아요. 바람을 가르며 갈아요.”
한스가 걸음을 멈추고 뚫어지게 바라보다 마침내 그에게 말했어요.
“좋아 보이시네요, 일하는 모습이 흥겨워 보여요.”
“암,”라며 가위 가는 사람이 대답했어요. “이만한 직업도 없지. 잘하는 사람들은 그냥 호주머니에 돈이 수북해. 그래 그 거위는 어디서 샀는감?”
“제가 산 건 아니고요, 돼지와 맞바꿨어요.”
“그럼 그 돼지는?”
“돼지는 젖소랑 바꾸었고요.”
“그럼 그 젖소는?”
“그건 말과 바꾸었어요.”
“그럼 그 말은?”
“그건 제 머리만한 금덩어리와 바꾸었어요.”
“그럼 그 금은 어디서 났는감?”
“그건, 제 7년 치 임금으로 받은 거예요.”
“매번 잘 살펴보고 해겠지만,”라며 가위 가는 사람이 말했어요. “일어설 때마다 호주머니에서 돈이 쨍그랑거리는 소리를 듣자면야 이만한 게 없지, 어떤가 한 밑천 챙겨보겠나.”  
“정말 그래주시겠어요?”라며 한스가 말했어요.
“자네를 보니 나만큼이나 이 직업이 어울리겠어서 하는 말이네. 이 회전식 맷돌 하나만 있으면 된다네, 나머진 저절로 되지. 여기 있네. 보기엔 낡아보여도 이만한 게 없지. 자넨 그냥 그 거위만 내게 주면 되니, 어떤가?” 
“그걸 말이라고 하십니까?”라며 한스가 대답했어요. “난 정말 이 세상에서 가장 운 좋은 녀석이 될 거야. 호주머니 속에 손만 넣으면 돈이 찰랑거릴 텐데 더는 고민거리가 어디 있겠어?”
한스가 그에게 거위를 건네주고 대신 회전 숫돌을 받아들었어요.
“이제,”라며 가위 가는 사람이 자기 옆에 있던 평범하고 아주 무거워 보이는 돌멩이까지 하나 집어 한스에게 건네주며 말했어요. “자 이 튼튼한 돌은 덤으로 자네에게 주는 것일세. 이걸로 숫돌 위를 때리면 못 쓰는 못들도 금방 펴진다네. 그럼 소중히 잘 가져가게나.” 
한스는 그 무거운 돌들을 등에 이고 만족해선 계속 걸었어요. 이제 그의 눈엔 서광이 비추고 있었답니다.
“나 같은 행운아는 없을 거야{원문→난 ‘대망막’(=양막)을 뒤집어쓰고 태어났던 게 분명해. 당시 길조로 여겼음.}.”라며 그가 소리쳤어요. “내게 마치 ‘주의 은총이 가득한’(원문→일요일 어린이) 마냥 겪는 일들마다 다 잘 풀렸잖아.”
그러는 사이, 새벽부터 종일 걸었던지라 급 피곤해지기 시작했어요.
게다가 배고픔 또한 장난이 아니었고요. 왜냐면 젖소를 얻었을 때 너무 기뻐 다신 필요하지 않을 거라 여기고 가지고 간 음식물들을 한꺼번에 다 먹어치웠으니까요.
마침내 고통이 너무도 커 한 걸음 디딜 때마다 쉬어야했어요.
등에 이고 있던 돌들 또한 끔찍이도 무거웠고요.
급기야 그는 이 돌들만 없으면 어떻게 걸어가볼 수 있겠는데 하고 생각하기에 이르렀어요.
그가 달팽이처럼 거의 기다시피 하여 들판에 있던 우물에 다다랐어요.
시원한 물을 한 모금 마셔 기운을 북돋우며 휴식을 취할 생각이었죠.
하지만 앉을 때 돌멩이들이 부스지지 않도록 조심해가며 돌멩이들을 우물가에 잘 내려놓았어요.  
그런 다음 우물 위에 앉아 몸을 숙이고 물을 막 마시려고 하다, 그만 미끄러져 넘어지는 바람에 옆에 둔 돌멩이들을 밀치고 말았어요.
그 바람에 두 돌들이 물 속에 풍덩 빠지고 말았답니다.
자신의 돌들이 우물 바닥까지 가라앉는 것을 두 눈으로 똑똑히 지켜보던 한스가 그제야 뛸 듯이 기뻐하며 벌떡 일어서는데 그의 두 눈엔 하느님에 대한 감사함으로 눈물범벅이 되어 있었어요. 이런 좋은 방법으로 구원을 주시다니요. 자신을 질책할 어떤 필요성도 없이, 그 무겁던 돌들에서 해방되었으니까요.
“태양 아래 나만큼 운발이 터인 사람도 없을 거야.”라며 그가 소리 질렀어요.
콩닥콩닥 뛰는 가슴과 무거운 짐에서 갓 풀려난 해방감에 겨워 그는 엄마 집까지 한걸음에 달려갔답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「운 좋은 한스」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「운 좋은 한스」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter83.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



84. 한스, 결혼하다



옛날 옛적에 ‘한스’(남자이름. ‘독일사람’이란 뜻)라는 이름을 가진 젊은 농부가 한 명 살고 있었습니다.
그의 친삼촌은 한스에게 부잣집 아내를 찾아주고 싶었어요.
그런 까닭에 삼촌은 한스를 난로 뒤편에 앉혀 목을 따뜻하게 녹이게 했지요.
그런 다음 삼촌은 우유 한 병과 흰 빵을 풍부하게 가져와 그에게 주고, 손엔 새로 나와 반짝반짝한 동전 하나도 쥐어주며 말했지요.
“한스, 이 동전 단단히 쥐고서, 흰 ‘빵’(=식량=bread. ‘빵’과 ‘식량’은 같은 영어단어임. 그림형제 동화집 독일어원문엔 ‘brot’/보으트/로 되어 있음)을 뜯어서 우유에 넣고 여기 앉아 있어봐, 내가 돌아올 때까지 거기서 꿈쩍도 하면 안 돼.”
“네,”라며 한스가 말했어요. “이러고 있을 게요.”
그런 다음 중매쟁이(삼촌)는 낡고 얼룩진 바지를 꺼내 입고는 이웃 마을에 사는 부자농부의 딸에게 가 말했어요.
“내 조카 한스랑 결혼하지 않을래요… 당신에게 딱 맞는 정직하고 사리 분별 있는 남자를 얻고 싶지 않으세요?”
구미가 당긴 아빠가 물었어요.
“그래 그의 재산이 대충 얼마쯤 되나? 뜯어먹을 ‘식량’(=빵)은 좀 있고?”
“말마다요,”라며 중매쟁이(삼촌)가 대답했어요. “제 어린 조카는 포근히 잘 있고, 손에 돈도 반짝 쥐고 있고, 뜯을 ‘식량’(=빵)도 많죠. 게다가 저만큼이나 많은 ‘밭’(=‘헝겊 조각’=patch. ‘밭’과 ‘헝겊 조각’은 같은 영어단어임. 그림형제 동화집 독일어원문엔 ‘Placken’/플락컨/이라고 되어 있음.)을 가지고 있지요.”
그는 그 말을 하면서 헝겊 조각들이 덕지덕지 붙어 있는 자신의 바지를 팍팍 때렸어요.
하지만 ‘헝겊 조각’이란 말과 ‘밭’은 같은 말(patch)이잖아요.
“저와 함게 지금 집으로 가보시면, 제 말이 참말이란 걸 아시게 될 것입니다.”
그래서 이 좋은 기회를 놓칠 수 없던 구두쇠가 말했어요.
“그렇다면야, 이 결혼을 마다할 추호의 이유가 없네.”
그리하여 결혼식이 ‘정한’(정해진) 날에 거행되었지요.
어린 신부는 밖으로 나가 신랑의 재산이 어느 정도인지 보고 싶어 했어요.
한스는 자신의 나들이용 외투를 벗고 헝겊 조각이 덕지덕지 붙은 작업복을 입더니 말했어요. 
“비싼 외투를 더럽힐 순 없지.”
그들이 함께 밖으로 나갔을 때, 땅의 경계선이 보일 때마다, 그리고 밭들과 목초지들이 서로 구분지어질 때마다, 한스는 자신의 손가락으로 가리켰어요. 
그런 다음 자기 작업복에 덕지덕지 붙어 있는 커고 작은 ‘헝겊조각’(=밭)들을 퍽퍽 치며 말했지요.
“이 ‘헝겊조각’(=밭)도 원래 내거였고, 이것도 내 거지, 그냥 한 번 (나 좀) 보기라도 하지.”
그 말의 의미는 아내가 하도 넓은 땅을 쳐다보느라 정신이 팔려 있자, 딴 데 보지 말고 자기 소유의 옷을 봐달라는 의미였지요.

(아래의 글은 다른 결혼식에 다녀온 농부와 농부 친구의 대화입니다. 그림형제 동화집 독일어원문에도 있는 앞뒤 전혀 안 맞는 글입니다.)

“너 정말 결혼식에 다녀왔다며?”
“응, 나도 정말 정장차림을 하고서 거기 있었다네. 내 모자는 눈이었는데. 해가 뜨니 눈이 녹아내리더군. 내 외투는 거미집들이었는데. 거미집들을 털어내기 위해 가시나무 옆을 지나가야 했지. 내 신발은 유리컵이었는데. 돌부리에 부딪치니 ‘땡그랑’하고 두 동강이 나고 말지 뭐야.”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「한스, 결혼하다」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. (단어2개와 문장1개는 독일어 원문을 참조했습니다.)

「한스, 결혼하다」  
영어동화 ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter84.html 
독일어 원문 ▶ https://de.wikisource.org/wiki/Hans_heirathet_(1857)  

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



85. 황금 아이들



옛날 옛적에 정말 가진 것이라곤 자그마한 오두막 한 채 뿐인 가난한 남성과 아내가 살았어요. 남성은 낚시로 밥벌이를 하였는데 겨우 벌어 입에 풀칠만 할 정도였어요.
하지만 그러다 우연히도 어느 날 남자는 물가에 앉아 그물을 던졌는데 온통 금빛을 한 물고기 한 마리가 끌려나오는 거예요.
게다가 그 물고기가 말까지 시작하니 남자는 눈이 휘둥그레졌지요.
“들어보세요, 낚시꾼 어르신, 저를 다시 물가에 던져주세요, 그럼 제가 당신의 작은 오두막을 화려한 성채로 바꾸어드릴게요.”
낚시꾼이 대답했어요.
“성이 내게 뭔 소용이냐, 먹을 것도 하나도 없는 데?”
황금 물고기가 계속 말을 이어갔어요.
“그것도 해결해드릴게요, 성 안에 있는 찬장을 여시면 가장 맛있는 고기들이 담긴 접시들이 원하는 만큼 있을 거예요.”
“그렇담 좋다.”라며 남자가 말했어요. “내 너를 풀어주마.”
“네,”라며 물고기가 말했어요. “하지만 행운을 어찌 얻게 되었는지는 절대 이 세상 누구에게도 발설해서는 안 돼요, 만에 하나 입을 벙끗하셨다간 모두 물거품이 되고 마신다고요.”
그런 다음 남자가 이 신비로운 물고기를 다시 물에 던져주고 집으로 왔어요.
하지만 자신의 오두막집이 서 있던 곳엔 이제 큰 성채가 하나 서 있었어요.
눈이 휘둥그레진 남자가 들어가 보니, 아내가 아름다운 옷들을 입고 화려한 방에 앉아 대단히 흡족해하며 있다 말했어요.
“여보, 이게 다 뭐래요? 글쎄 제게 딱 맞지 뭐예요.”
“그렇군,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “내게도 딱 맞군. 그런데 너무 배가 고파서 그러는데, 먹을 거 좀 있음 내 오시게나.”
아내가 말했어요. 
“없어요, 새 집이라서 어디에 뭐가 있는지 도통 모르겠지 뭐예요.”
“몰라도 돼,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “저기 큰 찬장으로 가서 열기만 하면 된데.”
아내가 열자, 케이크며 고기며 과일이며 포도주가 방실방실 웃으며 가득 들어있었어요.
그래서 아내가 너무 좋아라하며 소리쳤어요.
“그래, 뭘 드시고 싶다고요?”
그들은 앉아 함께 먹고 마셨답니다.
배가 부르자 아내가 말했어요.
“하지만 여보, 이게 다 어디서 난 거래요?”
“아아,”라며 그가 대답했어요. “알려고 하지 마, 난 말할 수 없으니까. 내가 누구에게든 입도 벙긋했다간 모든 행운이 날아가 버린댔어.” 
“조심할게요.”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “그렇다면야 더 알려고 말아야죠.”
하지만 그건 그녀의 본심이 아니었어요.
그녀는 정말이지 밤낮으로 한시도 편치 않았어요. 그래서 남편의 인내심이 한계에 도달해 모두 자신이 잡은 신비한 황금 물고기 덕분이라고 털어놓을 때까지 그녀는 남편을 달달 볶았어요.
그 대가로 남자는 자유를 얻었지만 즉시 웅장한 성채와 찬장은 사라지고 없었죠.
그들이 다시 낡은 낚시꾼의 오두막집에 살게 되었어요.
남자는 전처럼 낚시를 하며 끼니를 벌어야했지요.
하지만 한 번 터인 운은 계속 찾아왔지 뭐예요.
그가 한 번 더 황금 물고기를 끌어올린 거예요. 
“들어주세요,”라며 그 물고기가 말했어요. “저를 다시 물로 던져주시면, 제가 구운 고기와 삶은 고기들로 가득한 찬장이 있던 그 성채를 다시 돌려드리도록 할 게요. 하지만 한 번 더 말씀드리지만, 아저씨의 신상을 위해 절대 누구 덕분에 그걸 얻게 된 건지는 발설해서는 안 돼요, 안 그러심 모두 잃고 마실 거예요!”
“내 조심하마,”라며 낚시꾼이 대답하곤 그 물고기를 도로 물에 놓아주었어요.
집에 도착해보니 모든 게 다시 예전 화려하던 그때로 돌아가 있었어요.
아내는 거듭된 행운에 복이 겨워하고 있었어요.
하지만 또 달달 볶으며 “이게 다 어찌된 일이냐?”며 이틀을 물어봤지요.
하지만 남자는 이번엔 그럭저럭 며칠을 가 입도 벙긋하지 않았지만, 결국 아내가 자신을 너무도 짜증나게 하자 꼭지가 돌아 비밀을 누설하고 말았어요.
그 즉시 성채가 사라지고 그들은 예전 그 낡은 오두막집에 살고 있었어요.
“이제 당신이 바란 대로 되었구려.”라며 그가 말했어요. “차라리 쫄쫄 굶으며 사는 게 낫지.”
“아,”라며 아내가 말했어요. “누가 준 건지도 모르는 부를 어찌 누리란 거예요, 그러니 제가 안절부절이지요.”
남자는 다시 낚시를 하러 갔고, 한참 후 다시 그 황금물고기를 세 번째로 끌어올렸답니다. 
“들어보세요,”라며 물고기가 말했어요. “제가 보니, 전 아무래도 아저씨의 품에 들어갈 팔자인가 봐요. 저를 집으로 가지고 가서 여섯 조각으로 자르신 다음, 두 조각은 아내에게 먹이시고, 두 조각은 말에게 먹이고, 남은 두 조각은 마당에 묻으세요. 그럼 그것들이 아저씨께 축복을 가져다줄 거예요.”
낚시꾼이 물고기를 집으로 가져가, 물고기가 시킨 대로 했어요.
그랬더니 두 조각을 땅에 묻은 곳에서 황금 백합 두 송이가 피어올랐어요. 그리고 두 조각을 먹은 말이 황금 말 새끼 두 마리를 낳았고, 낚시꾼의 아내도 온통 황금빛인 두 아이들을 출산했답니다.
아이들은 자라 키도 크고 잘생겼어요, 그리고 백합과 말들도 마찬가지로 쑥쑥 잘 자랐지요.
그래서 그들이 말했어요.
“아빠, 저희의 황금 말들을 타고 세상을 여행해보고 싶어요.”
하지만 그는 슬퍼서 대답했어요.
“너희들이 가고나면 나는 어찌 살란 말이니, 너희들이 잘 지내는지도 나는 모르게 되잖니?”
그때 그들이 말했어요.
“황금백합 두 송이가 여기 있을 거잖아요. 그걸 보고서 저희가 잘 있는지를 아실 수 있을 거예요. 만약 백합들이 싱싱하면 저희도 건강한 거고, 만약 백합들이 시들면 저희도 아픈 거고, 만약 백합들이 죽으면 저희도 죽은 거예요.”
그렇게 그들은 말을 타고 떠나 어느 여인숙에 도착했어요. 거기엔 사람들이 무척 많았어요. 그들이 황금 아이들을 보자 웃기 시작하더니 야유를 보냈어요.  
두 형제 중 한 명이 이 조롱에 몹시 상처를 입고 세상을 더 돌아다녀볼 마음이 나지 않아 방향을 돌려 아빠가 계신 집으로 돌아가 버렸어요.
하지만 다른 한 명은 말을 타고 게속 나아가 울창한 숲에 도착했어요.
그가 막 숲에 들어가려하자 사람들이 말하기를, 말을 타고 들어갔다간 큰 일 난다는 거예요, 그 숲엔 도둑들이 잔뜩 있는데 그에게 무슨 짓을 할지 모른다는 거죠.
“골로 갈 거야, 그들이 온통 황금빛인 너와 말을 보면 냉큼 죽일 걸.”
하지만 그는 두려움에 굴복하지 않고 말했어요.
“그래도 이 숲을 통과해야겠습니다.”
대신 그는 곰 가죽들을 집어 자신의 몸과 말을 덮어 더 이상 황금빛깔이 안 보이게 조치했어요.
그런 다음 그가 두려움 없이 말을 타고 숲에 들어갔답니다.
그가 말을 타고 조금 들어가니, 수풀에서 바스락거리며 서로 주고받는 소리가 들렸어요.
하나가 상대방에게 말했지요.
“저기 한 놈 온다.”
하지만 상대방이 말했어요.
“그냥 가게 내버려둬, 꼴을 보라고, 교회 생쥐 마냥 꾀죄죄한 옷을 걸쳤잖아, 저런 놈 잡아서 뭐하게?”
그리하여 황금 아이는 어떤 해코지도 당하지 않고서 무사히 숲을 통과할 수 있었답니다.
어느 날 그가 어느 마을에 들어섰다가 정말 이보다 더 아름다운 여인이 이 세상에 있을까 싶은 처녀를 보고 말았어요.
그렇게 강력한 사랑의 포로가 된 그가 그녀에게 가 말했어요.
“나는 당신을 진심으로 사랑하오, 나의 아내가 되어주시겠소?”
그녀도 그가 무척이나 마음에 들었기에, 그녀는 동의하며 말했어요.
“네, 당신의 아내가 되어드릴게요, 제 온 생을 다해 당신께 진실 할게요.”
그런 다음 그들이 결혼을 했어요.
그렇게 그들이 더없는 행복감에 겨워있는데, 신부의 아빠가 집에 왔다가 자신의 딸이 웬 모르는 남자와 결혼식을 놀렸다기에 깜짝 놀라 말했어요.
“그 놈 어디 있어?”
사람들이 그에게 황금 아이를 보여주었지요, 하지만 그때 황금 아이는 곰 가죽들을 쓰고 있었어요.
그러자 아빠가 격노하며 말했어요.
“저런 거지에게 내 딸내미를 줄 거 같아!”
그러면서 아빠는 막 그를 죽이려고 했어요.
그때 신부가 울고불고하며 빌면서 말했어요.
“그이는 제 남편이에요, 저는 그이를 정말 사랑한다고요!”
결국 아빠도 마음을 누그러뜨리고 말았지요.
그럼에도 불구하고 어떤 생각 하나가 머릿속에서 떠나가지 않아서, 다음날 아침 일찍 딸의 남편이 정말 누더기 거지인지 아닌지를 보려고 일어났어요.
하지만 그가 안을 엿봤을 때, 엄청난 황금빛을 뿜고 있는 남자가 침대에 있고, 바닥엔 곰 가죽들이 던져져 있었지요.  
결국 아빠가 돌아서며 생각했어요.
‘화를 누르길 잘했어! 하마터면 큰 일 날 뻔 했구먼.’
하지만 황금 아이는 그때 말을 타고 빛나는 수사슴을 뒤쫓는 꿈을 꾸고 있었어요.
그가 아침에 깨어나더니 아내보고 말했어요.
“사냥을 나가야겠소.”
그녀가 감이 안 좋아 가지 말고 집에 있어 달라 간청하며 말했어요.
“그러다 큰 재앙이라도 만나면 어쩌려고요.”
하지만 그는 대답했어요.
“아야, 꼭 가봐야겠어.”
그 후 즉시 일어나더니 말을 타고 그가 숲으로 향했어요.
멀리가지 않아 그가 꿈속에서 본 멋진 수사슴 한 마리와 마주했지요.
그가 조준을 하고 막 쏘려는데, 수사슴이 달아났어요.
그는 하루 꼬박 지치는 지도 모르고 그 수사슴을 쫓아 산울타리들을 건너고 도랑을 뛰어넘었어요.
그렇게 저녁 무렵이 되자 그 수사슴이 시야에서 사라졌어요.
황금 아이가 주변을 둘러보니 때마침 작은 집이 한 채 서 있는데 그 안엔 마녀가 살고 있었어요.
그가 노크하자, 작고 나이 많은 여자가 밖으로 나오더니 물었어요.
“이런 야심한 밤에 이 울창한 숲 한 복판에 어인 일이신가?”
“수사슴 못 보셨소?”
“응,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “그 수사슴을 잘 알지.”
그때 갑자기 그녀가 키우는 작은 개 한 마리가 집밖으로 뛰어나오더니 남자를 향해 마구 짖어대기 시작했어요.
“입 다물지 못해, 이 밉살스러운 녀석아,”라며 그가 말했어요. “안 그럼 총으로 쏴 버릴 테다.”
그러자 마녀가 울화통을 터뜨리며 소리쳤어요.
“뭐! 네까짓 게 내 귀여운 강아지를 죽이겠다고?”
그 즉시 마녀가 그를 변신시켜버렸어요. 그래서 그는 돌이 되어 바닥에 드러누워버렸죠.
그의 신부가 오매불망 기다렸지만 허사였어요. 
신부가 생각했어요.
‘내가 너무 두려워하던 게 내 마음을 무겁게 짓눌러, 그이에게 뭔 일이 생겼나봐!’
한편 또 다른 형제가 때마침 황금 백합들 옆에 서 있다가, 황금 백합 한 송이가 갑자기 시들며 축 쳐지는 것을 보았어요.
“맙소사!”라며 그가 말했어요. “내 형에게 뭔 일이 생겼나봐! 내가 그를 구할 수 있는지 가봐야겠어.”
그때 아빠가 말했어요.
“여기 있거라, 너마저 잃으면, 난 어쩌란 말이니?”
하지만 그는 대답했어요.
“아닙니다, 반드시 가봐야겠어 그래요!”
그런 다음 그가 황금 말을 타고 출발해 형이 돌로 변해 드러누워 있는 그 울창한 숲으로 들어갔어요.
집 밖으로 나온 늙은 마녀는 그를 함정에 빠뜨리려 불렀어요.
하지만 그는 그녀 가까이론 가지 않고 말했어요.
“만약 내 형을 다시 살려내지 않음 쏠 거요.”
그녀가 아니 내켜하며 집게손가락으로 돌을 건드리자, 형이 즉시 사람의 형상으로 되돌아오며 살아났어요. 
형제끼리 다시 상봉하게 된 황금 아이들은 뛸 듯이 기뻐 서로에게 키스와 포옹을 해주었어요.
그런 다음 함께 말을 타고 숲을 빠져나와, 한 명은 신부가 있는 집으로 가고, 다른 한 명은 아빠가 계신 고향집으로 갔어요.
그때 아빠가 말했지요.
“난 네가 형을 구한 줄 알았다, 왜냐면 황금 백합이 갑자기 일어나며 다시 꽃을 피우지 뭐냐.”
그리하여 그들은 죽을 때까지 하는 일마다 다 성공하며 행복하게 잘 살았답니다. 
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「황금 아이들」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「황금 아이들」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter85.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



86. 여우와 거위들



여우가 한 번은 풀밭에 갔다가, 토실토실 살찐 거위들이 한 무리 있는 것을 발견했지요.
여우가 미소 지으며 말했어요.
“때마침 왔네, 고놈들 참 맛있게도 생겼네, 내가 한 마리씩 차례대로 잡아먹어야지.”
거위들이 공포에 질러 꽥꽥거리며 팔짝팔짝 뛰어오르며 제발 불쌍히 여기사 목숨만 살려달라 빌었어요.
하지만 그딴 소리들에 흔들릴 여우가 아니었지요.
그가 말했어요.
“자비는 무슨 얼어 죽을 자비! 너희가 죽을 일만 남았다.”
마침내 거위들 중 한 명이 진심을 다해 울먹이며 말했어요.
“저희들이 원기 왕성한 어린 것들인 걸 불쌍히 여기사, 기도 한 번만 올리게 호의를 베풀어주십시오. 저희들도 죽을 때 죽더라도 죄지은 채 죽을 순 없잖아요, 그런 다음 일렬로 줄을 서 드릴 테니, 그때 가장 살찐 놈부터 고르시면 됩니다.”
“그래,”라며 여우가 말했어요. “그거 참 합당하네. 게다가 신앙심 깊은 요청이니 내 받아들이지. 기도를 드리거라, 너희들이 마칠 때까지 기다려주마.”  
그렇게 첫 번째 거위가 아주 긴 기도를 시작하더니. 아주 그냥 영원히 할 판이었어요.
“꽥! 꽥!”
그녀의 기도가 종결될 기미를 보이지 않자, 두 번째 거위가 자기 차례를 기다리지 못하고 “꽥! 꽥!”거리며 기도를 시작했어요.
그러자 세 번째와 네 번째 거위들도 두 번째 거위를 따라 기도를 시작했고, 곧 모든 거위들이 함께 죽어라 “꽥! 꽥!”거리기 시작했어요.
어째 거위들의 기도가 끝이 나야 동화가 더 계속되는 거잖아요, 그런데 아세요?, 거위들의 기도는 현재까지도 계속되고 있다네요. (ㅋㅋㅋ)
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「여우와 거위들」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「여우와 거위들」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter86.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



87. 가난뱅이와 부자



사실 옛날엔 하느님께서 이 땅에 내려와 우리 인간들과 함께 생활하시곤 하셨지요.
그러다 한 번은 그 분께서 어두운 밤에 몹시 지칠 정도로 걸으셨지만 여인숙이 보이지 않는 거예요.
때마침 거기엔 길 양쪽으로 서로 마주보고 집 두 채가 서 있었어요.
하나는 커고 아름다운 집이었고, 다른 하나는 작고 볼품없는 집이었지요.
큰 집은 부자 네 집이었고, 작은 집은 가난뱅이 남자의 집이었어요.
하느님께서 생각하셨지요.
‘부자 네가 부자니까 내가 밤을 지내는 게 민폐가 되지 않을 거야.’
그리하여 부자의 귀에 누군가가 문을 노크하는 소리가 들리게 된 것이죠.
그가 창문을 열어 이방인에게 뭘 원하시냐고 물었지요.
하느님이 대답하셨어요.
“오늘 밤 묵어갈까 하네.”
그러자 부자가 여행객을 머리끝에서부터 발끝까지 훑어보았죠.
물론 그때 그 분께서는 평범한 옷을 입고 계셔서 전혀 호주머니에 돈이 있을 거 같이 보이시지 않았죠.
부자가 고개를 절레절레 흔들며 말했어요.
“안돼요, 당신을 묵게 할 수 없습니다. 내 방들엔 지금 약초와 종자(씨앗)들로 가득 들어차 있거든요. 그러고 이렇게 문 두드리는 모든 사람들을 다 재워주면 난 금방 빈털터리가 되고 말 걸. 딴 데 가 보쇼.”
이 말을 하곤 창문을 쾅 닫아버렸어요. 
그렇게 하느님만 쓸쓸히 서 계셨답니다.
하느님이 부잣집에서 몸을 돌려 작은 집으로 건너가 문을 두드리셨어요.
그러자마자 가난뱅이 남자가 작은 문을 열어주며 여행객보고 안으로 들어오시라 청했어요.
“저희 집에서 하룻밤 묵으시지요, 날이 이미 저물어.”라며 그가 말했어요. “이대로는 더 가실 수 없으세요.”
이 말이 하느님을 기쁘게 했어요. 그 분께서 안으로 드셨어요.
가난뱅이 아내가 그 분에게 악수를 청하며 반갑게 맞이했어요.
“내 집이라 생각하시고 쉬세요. 누추하지만 지내 실만 할 거예요.”
그들의 생활은 넉넉지 않았어요. 그래도 그들은 진심껏 뭐든 그 분께 내어드리려 했죠.
그녀가 감자들을 불 위에 얹었어요.
감자가 익는 동안 그녀는 염소에게서 우유를 잤어요. 적은 양이나마 하느님께 드리기 위해서죠.
상이 차려지자 하느님께서 남자와 그의 아내와 함께 자리에 앉아 거친 식사를 참말로 맛있게도 드셨어요. 식탁에 앉은 그들 부부의 행복해 보이는 얼굴이 더없는 반찬이었거든요.
저녁식시가 끝나고 취침시간이 되자, 여자가 남편을 따로 불러 말했어요.
“여보, 당신, 오늘 밤은 우리가 밀짚 위에서 자고, 저 불쌍한 여행객보고는 우리 침대에서 편히 주무시라 그럽니다. 온종일 먼 길을 오셨을 테니 얼마나 지치고 피곤하시겠어요.”
“내 생각도 그렀소.”라며 남편이 대답했어요. “내가 가서 그리 말씀드려보리다.”
그가 손님에게 가더니 청했어요.
“실례가 아니면 오늘밤은 저희 침대에서 주무시지요, 다리도 아프실 텐데.”
하지만 하느님이 어디 그들을 밀짚에서 재우실 분이신가요.
하지만 그들 부부가 한사코 권하는 바람에 결국 하느님이 침대를 쓰고, 그들 부부가 바닥에 밀짚을 깔고 누웠답니다.
다음날 아침 그들 부부는 동트기 전에 기상해 손님이 드실 아침을 정성껏 준비했어요.
따사로운 햇살이 작은 창문 사이로 비치자 하느님께서도 자리에서 일어나 그들과 함께 식사를 하시곤 다시 여행길을 떠날 준비를 하셨어요.
하지만 현관문을 넘으시다 말고 하느님께서 몸을 돌리시더니 말했어요.
“참으로 친절하고 착하시오, 내 당신들의 세 가지 소원을 들어드리리다, 말씀해보시오.”
그러자 남편이 말했어요.
“영생(하느님을 믿고 살아감)을 바라는 거 말고야, 그냥 저희 둘 이렇게 살아가는 동안 건강하면 좋겠고 매일같이 입에 풀칠이라도 할 수 있었음 합니다. 세 번째 소원은 생각이 나지 않습니다요.”
그러자 하느님께서 남자에게 말했어요.
“헌집 대신 새 집은 어떠시오?”
“오, 그럼 좋지요.”라며 남자가 말했어요. “그래만 되어 준다면야, 더 바랄 것이 없습니다요.”
그의 소원이 하느님을 만족시키셨어요. 그래서 하느님은 그의 헌집으로 새집으로 바꾸어주시고, 축복을 내려주신 다음 계속 여행길에 올랐어요.
해가 가장 높이 떴을 때, 부자도 기상해 창문 밖으로 고개를 내밀어 봤더니 아니 이게 뭔가요 건너편에 붉은 타일로 새로 지은 집 한 채가 떡하니 서 있지 뭐예요, 그리고 예전 낡았던 오두막집은 온데간데없고 말이죠.
하도 기가 차 부자가 아내를 불러 말했어요.
“말해 봐, 이게 대체 뭔 뚱딴지같은 일이야? 어젯밤까지 저기 서 있던 끔찍이도 허름한 오두막은 어디가고, 오늘 이렇게 아름다운 새 집이 있는 거냐고. 어서 건너가서 이게 어찌된 일인지 물어보고 와.”
그래서 그의 아내가 가서 가난뱅이 남자에게 물었어요.
그가 말했어요.
“어제 밤에 한 여행객이 와서 하룻밤만 재워 달라 청하시기에 그랬더니 오늘 아침 떠나시면서 세 가지 소원, 영생(종교적인 삶), 사는 동안 든든한 빵과 건강을 주시고, 추가로 헌집 대신 아름다운 새 집으로 주시고 가셨지 뭡니까.”
부자의 아내는 이 말을 듣자마자 허급지급 달려와 남편에게 자초지종(전 과정)을 말해주었어요.
부자가 말했어요.
“이런 말 같지도 않은! 내가 그것만 알았어도! 그 여행객이 우리 집에도 와 재워 달라 청했단 말이야, 난 그런 그를 그냥 보내버렸고.”
“아이고!”라며 아내가 말했어요. “어서 말을 타고 그 사람을 쫓아가보세요, 붙잡거든 당신에게도 세 가지 소원을 듣게 해 달라 부탁하세요.”
부자가 이 기막힌 조언에 따라 즉시 말을 타고 급히 달려 곧 하느님을 따라잡았어요.
부자가 그분께 나근나근하게 그리고 친근감 있게 “어제는 사정이 여의치 않아 곧장 재워드리지 못한 겁니다. 더구나 제가 현관문 열쇠를 찾는데 그새 가버리시기가 어디 있습니까. 돌아오실 때는 저희집에 들리셔서 꼭 머물러주십시오.”라고 말했어요.
“그리하리다.”라며 하느님께서 말했어요. “내 언제가 다시 가게 되면, 꼭 그리하리다.”
그런 다음 부자는 “그럼 저에게도, 이웃집에 하셨던 대로, 세 가지 소원을 들어주실 수 없으십니까?”라고 말했어요.
“그리하리다.”라며 하느님이 말했어요. “다만 당신은 어떤 것도 빌지 않는 게 나을 거 같은데.”
하지만 부자는 지금 자신이 누리는 행복을 더 높일 수 있는 갖가지 소원들이 금방 생각날 거 같았어요. 그래도 부자는 “생각해보고 소원을 빌겠다.”고 말했지요.
그래서 하느님이 그에게 말했어요.
“그리하시오, 말을 타고 집으로 돌아가시어, 곰곰이 생각해보고 이거면 좋겠다 싶은 걸로 세 가지 소원을 비시구려.”
부자가 “꼭 그러겠습니다.”라며 하느님께 확답을 받은 다음 말을 타고 돌아오며 뭘 빌어야 제대로 빌게 된 걸까 곰곰이 생각에 잠기었더랬죠.
그러다 그만 말고삐를 손에서 놓고 말았어요.
그러자 말이 사방으로 뛰어 돌아다니기 시작했어요.
이렇게 자꾸 생각이 방해를 당하자 부자는 생각을 정리할 수가 없었어요.
그가 말의 목을 토닥이며 말했어요.
“진정해, 리자.”
하지만 말이 새로 또 곡예를 부리기 시작했어요.
마침내 꼭지가 돈 부자가 성질이 나서 확 내뱉어버렸어요.
“자꾸 이럼 네 목이 부러지게 해 달라 빈다!”
그 말을 내뱉자마자 즉시 말이 땅바닥에 쓰러지며 죽어버려 두 번 다신 꿈쩍도 하지 않았어요.
이리하여 그의 첫 번째 소원이 이루어진 거예요.
그는 워낙에 자린고비 구두쇠였기에, 말안장(말 등에 얹는 거)을 거기 두고 가기가 죽기보다 싫었어요.
그래서 그가 말안장을 떼어내 등에 이고 뚜벅뚜벅 걷기 시작했어요.
“어디 두고 보라지, 내 나머지 두 가지 소원은 기똥차게 빌 거니까.”라며 부자는 말을 하고 나니 마음이 안정이 되며 편안해짐을 당장은 느껴졌어요.
하지만 그렇게 계속 모래밭 위만 걷다보니, 뭔 놈의 태양이 아주 그냥 쨍쨍 내리쬐다 못해 피부가 다 탈 지경으로 내리쬐니 부자도 점점 성이 나고 신경질적으로 변하지 않을 수가 없었지요.
이젠, 말안장이 등을 짓누르는 가운데, 오매불망 모든 생각은 오로지 앞으로 이루어질 소원 생각뿐이었어요.
‘세상의 모든 보물을 다 달라 소원으로 빌 수도 있겠지만,’라며 그가 혼자 속으로 생각했어요. ‘아니야, 혹 나중에 뭔가 더 기가 막힌 소원이 떠오를 수 있으니 좀 더 생각해보자구. 이걸 미리 알았기에 다행이지, 나중에 알았어봐 얼마나 후회했겠어.’
그때 그가 한숨을 푸 쉬며 말했어요.
“아, 내가 ‘시골’(원문→바이에른 주. 독일 남쪽의 주. 아래의 구글지도 참조) 농부이고, 마찬가지로 세 가지 소원을 빌 기회가 주어진다면, 아마 이렇게 빌었겠지, 우선은 맥주 왕창 달라고 소원 빌고, 두 번째로 내가 양껏 마실 충분한 맥주를 달라 소원 빌고, 세 번째는 덤으로 맥주 통을 그냥 통째로 하나 달라고 빌었겠지.”
그가 이런 식으로 수없이 생각하고 또 생각하다보니, 어째 심술궂은 마음이 꼬이더니 결국 하나가 삐끗해 불쑥 어떤 생각 하나가 그의 머릿속에 떠오르고 말았어요.
‘이 망할 여편네는 지금쯤 시원한 방안에 죽치고 앉아서 먹고 있겠지.’
이 생각이 그를 정말 짜증나게 하지 뭐예요. 그래서 그가 미처 깨닫기도 전에 입에서 이런 말이 갑자기 튀어나오지 뭐예요.
“등 아파 죽겠네, 이 망할 놈의 말안장 마누라 엉덩이에나 가 딱 달라붙으라지 그래서 다신 일어날 수 없게 말이야.”
마지막 단어를 말하자마자, 말안장이 그의 등에서 사라졌기에, 그는 두 번째 소원이 이루어졌음을 알았답니다.
그러자 속이 확 뒤집힌 그가 냉큼 달리기 시작했어요.
이젠 정말이지 방안에만 콕 쳐 박혀선 오직 제대로 된 소원만 빌기 위해서죠.
하지만 집에 도착해 응접실 문을 열어보니, 마누라가 말안장에 앉아 방 한 복판에 앉아 있는 거예요. 울며불며 불평을 마구 늘어놓으면서요. 
“한시도 일어설 수 없다고요!”
그래서 남자가 말했어요.
“참아봐, 내가 이제 당신을 위해 이 세상 모든 부를 다 가지게 해 달라 빌어볼 테니까. 당신은 그냥 그대로 거기 있으라고.”
하지만 그녀는 남편을 바보라고 마구 욕하며 말했어요.
“마누라가 말안장에만 앉아 있어야 하는데, 세상에 보물이 뭔 상관이야? 당장 내가 이것과 떨어지게 빌지 못해.”
그리하여 남편은 자의반 타의반 세 번째 소원으로 아내가 말안장에서 떨어지게 해 달라고 소원을 빌 수밖에 없었지요.
그 즉시 소원이 이루어졌답니다.
그리하여 그는 하루 온종일의 짜증과 온갖 고초 그리고 욕들은 거와 자신의 말을 잃은 거 외엔 얻은 게 하나도 없었지요.
하지만 가난한 부부는 자신들의 즐거운 삶이 다할 때까지 신앙심 깊은 생활을 이어가며 행복하고 차분하게 잘 살았답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「가난뱅이와 부자」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「가난뱅이와 부자」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter87.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



88. 노래하며 팔짝거리는 종달새



옛날 옛적에요, 막 긴 여행을 떠나려는 남자가 있었어요.
그래서 자신의 세 딸들에게 “아빠가 돌아오면서 너희들을 위해 무엇을 사다주면 좋겠니?”라고 물었지요.
그 결과 큰딸은 진주를 바랬고요, 둘째딸은 다이아몬드를 원했어요. 
하지만 막내딸은 이렇게 말했어요.
“사랑하는 아빠, 전 노래하며 팔짝거리는 종달새가 좋아요.”
아빠가 말했어요.
“그래, 구할 수 있음, 꼭 구해오마.”
그런 다음 아빠는 세 딸애들에게 입맞춤한 후 길을 떠났어요.
시간이 이제 그 남자가 집으로 돌아오는 때가 되었어요.
그는 이미 진주들과 다이아몬드들을 두 딸을 위해 샀어요, 하지만 아무리 수소문을 해보아도 막내딸이 가지고 싶다고 말한 노래하며 팔짝거리는 종달새를 찾을 수 없지 뭐예요.
이 때문에 남자가 우울했어요. 왜냐면 막내딸을 가장 귀여워했기 때문이지요.
그래서 그가 숲은 지나오는데, 그 한 복판에 웅장한 성이 하나 서 있는데, 그 성 가까이에 서 있던 나무 꼭대기에 노래하며 팔짝거리는 종달새가 있는 거예요.
“아하, 네(하인)가 바로 올라가 보거라!”라며 그가 아주 기뻐하며 하인을 불러 올라가 저 귀여운 생명체를 잡아오게 시켰어요.
그래서 하인이 막 그 나무에 접근하니, 사자(동물) 한 마리가 그 밑에서 불쑥 튀어나오며 몸을 막 흔들며 온 나무에 붙은 잎사귀들이 떨어져나갈 정도로 “어흥!”하고 으르렁거리지 뭐예요.
“어떤 놈이 감히 내 노래하며 팔짝거리는 종달새를 훔쳐가려는 게냐,”라며 사자가 소리쳤어요. “내가 잡아먹고 말겠다.”
그때 남자가 말했어요.
“새가 당신 소유인지 몰랐습니다. 저희가 저지른 무례를 용서해주시고 목숨만 살려주신다면 큰돈을 드리도록 하겠습니다.”
그 사자가 말했어요.
“무엇도 네 목숨을 구할 순 없다. 다만 네가 집에 돌아갔을 때 가장 먼저 너를 반기려 나오는 것을 내게 준다고 약속하면 그럼 내 너를 살려주고 덤으로 네 딸을 위해 저 새도 주도록 하겠다.” 
하지만 남자는 망설이다 말했어요.
“그건 제 막내딸 아이가 될 확률이 높습니다, 그 애가 저를 가장 사랑하기 때문에, 제가 깁에 돌아가면 언제나 그 애가 가장 먼저 뛰어나왔답니다.”
하지만 하인이 너무도 겁을 먹은지라 말했어요.
“나리를 제일 먼저 마중 나오는 게 고양이나 개가 될 수도 있지 않습니까? 꼭 나리의 따님일 리는 없습니다.”
그래서 남자도 설득당해 스스로를 속이고 말았지요, 그가 노래하고 팔짝거리는 종달새를 받고, 무엇이든 그를 가장 먼저 마중 나오는 것을 사자에게 주기로 약속했어요.
그가 고향에 도착해 집에 들어섰더니, 역시나 그를 가장 먼저 마중 나오는 것은 그가 가장 사랑하는 막내딸아이였어요.
그녀가 “아빠”를 부르며 달려 나와 안기고는 입 맞추었지요. 그리고 막내딸은 자신이 바라던 노래하며 팔짝거리는 종달새를 아빠가 가지고 온 걸 보곤 너무도 기뻐했어요.
하지만 아빠는 정말 억장이 무너질 지경이었어요. 그래서 울기 시작하며 말했어요.
“내 사랑하는 아가야, 이 작은 새를 가져오긴 했다만. 그 대가로, 내가 너를 야만스런 사자에게 주기로 약속 했단다, 이제 그가 너를 보면 갈가리 찢어 잡아먹을 텐데.”
그러면서 아빠는 딸에게 무슨 일이 있었던지 모두 얘기해주며, 어떤 어려움이 있어도 가지 말라 청했어요. 
하지만 그녀는 아빠를 위로하며 말했어요.
“사랑하는 아빠, 약속은 지켜져야 해요, 저는 거기로 가서 사자를 달래겠어요, 그런 다음 무사히 돌아올 테니 걱정 마세요.”
다음날 아침 그녀가 길을 물어 떠나 겁도 없이 그 숲으로 들어갔어요.
하지만 사자는 사실 마법에 걸린 왕자님이셨어요, 낮에만 마법 때문에 그와 그의 주변사람들 모두가 사자로 변해했었지만, 밤이 되면 모두들 원래 사람의 모습으로 돌아왔답니다.
그녀가 도착하자, 사람들은 그녀를 상냥하게 환영해주고 성으로 인도해주었어요.
밤이 되어 사자가 잘생긴 왕자님으로 변하자, 그들의 결혼식이 아주 성대하게 거행되었답니다. 
그들은 함께 행복하게 살았어요. 밤엔 깨어 있었고, 낮엔 잠을 잤지요.
그런 어느 날 그가 와 말했어요.
“내일 당신 아버님의 집에서 만찬이 있소, 당신 큰언니가 결혼하기 때문이오, 당신도 가보고 싶다고 하면, 내가 내 부하 사자들을 시켜 당신을 데려다 주리다.”
그녀가 말했어요.
“네, 아빠 얼굴을 꼭 다시 보고 싶어요.”
그런 다음 그녀는 사자들을 대동하고 거기로 갔어요. 
막내딸이 돌아오자 큰 기쁨이 있었어요. 가족들은 그녀가 사자에게 찢겨 죽었으리라 굳게 믿고 있었거든요.
하지만 그녀는 가족들에게, 자신이 얼마나 잘생긴 남편과 지내는지 그리고 얼마나 유복하게 지내는지, 말해주었답니다.
그런 다음 결혼식 만찬이 지속되는 동안 가족과 함께 머물다 그녀는 숲으로 다시 돌아갔어요.
작은언니 결혼식이 있을 때에도, 그녀는 다시 결혼식에 초대받았어요.
그녀가 사자에게 말했어요.
“이번엔 저 혼자 안 갈래요, 당신과 꼭 함께 가보고 싶어요.”
하지만 그 일은 사자 왕자님에게는 너무도 위험한 일이었어요. 왜냐면 촛불에서 새어나온 한 줄기 빛이라도 그에게 닿는 다면 그는 영락없이 비둘기로 변해 장작 7년은 다른 비둘기들과 함께 정처 없이 날아다녀야만했기 때문이지요. 
그녀가 말했어요.
“아아, 자랑 가요, 제가 보살펴드릴게요, 절대 어떠한 빛도 당신께 닿지 않게 해드릴게요.”
그리하여 그들이 어린 자식과 함께 길을 떠났어요.
그녀는 거기에 방 하나를 짓게 했어요. 그 방은 너무도 강하고 두꺼워 어떠한 빛줄기도 그 벽을 통과할 수 없었지요.
그 방안에 사자가 들어가 있는데, 때마침 결혼식 만찬장에 촛불들이 켜졌어요.
방문을 갓 베어온 나무로 만들다보니 나무가 휘어져 아무도 눈치 채지 못한 작은 틈새가 있었나 봐요.
결혼식은 화려하게 거행되었지요, 결혼식 행렬은 촛불과 횃불들을 들고 교회까지 갔다 돌아오는 것이었어요. 그때 이 방을 지나게 되었고, 빛줄기 하나가 새어 들어와 왕자님에게 가 닿았어요. 그가 즉시 변신해버렸어요. 그녀가 돌아와 방문을 열어보니 그는 이미 온데간데없고 새하얀 비둘기 한 마리만 거기 앉아 있었죠.
비둘기가 그녀에게 말했어요.
“7년 동안 나는 세상을 방랑하며 날아다녀야하고, 하지만 당신이 밟는 일곱 번째 발자국마다 내 붉은 피 한 방울과 흰 깃털 하나를 떨어뜨려놓겠소. 그게 당신에게 길을 알려줄 것이오. 만약 나를 뒤따라온다면 당신은 나를 마법에서 풀어줄 수 있을 거요.”
그 후 즉시 비둘기가 푸드덕 문밖으로 날아가 버렸어요. 
그녀가 그를 뒤따라갔어요.
그녀가 밟는 일곱 번째 걸음마다 어김없이 붉은 피 한 방울과 흰색 작은 깃털 하나가 떨어져 있어 그녀에게 길을 가르쳐주었어요.
그렇게 그녀는 계속 좀 더 좀 더 넓은 세상 속으로 걸어갔어요. 결코 뒤를 돌아보거나 휴식을 취하는 일 없이, 장적 7년 동안을 그렇게 보냈답니다.
이제 곧 그이를 마법에서 풀어나게 할 수 있다는 생각에 그녀는 기뻤어요.
아 하지만 아직 그러려면 넘어야할 게 너무도 많았답니다!
이런 식으로 앞으로 나아가는데 어느 순간 어떤 작은 깃털도 그리고 어떤 붉은 핏방울도 떨어져 있지 않은 거예요. 그녀가 눈을 들어보니 계속 보이던 비둘기가 사라지고 없었어요.
그녀가 속으로 생각했어요.
“이젠 누구도 너(그녀 자기 자신)를 도와줄 수 없어.”
그래서 그녀가 해님(남자)에게로 기어 올라가 말했어요.
“당신은 세상 모든 갈라진 틈 속을 비추시고, 모든 산봉우리 위를 비추시니, 제 흰새ㅤㅑㄱ 비둘기가 어디로 날아가는지 보시지 않으셨나요?”
“그래요,”라며 해님이 말했어요. “나도 못 보았소. 하지만 당신에게 이 작은 상자를 하나 주니, 몹시 ‘곤궁할’(어려울) 때 열어보시구려.”
그래서 그녀가 해님에게 감사인사를 한 다음 계속 걸었어요. 
저녁이 되자 달님이 나오셨어요.
그때 그녀가 달님에게 물었지요.
“당신은 온 밤을 비추시고, 모든 들과 숲 위에에도 비추시니, 혹 새하얀 비둘기 한 마리가 날아가는 걸 못 보셨나요?”
“그래요,”라며 달님이 말했어요. “어떤 비둘기도 못 본 걸요, 대신 이 달걀 하나를 드리니, 큰 어려움에 처하시면 이 달걀을 깨뜨려보세요.”
그녀가 달님에게 고맙다고 인사를 한 다음 계속 걸어었어요.
밤이 되자 강풍(=북풍)이 불어오더니 그녀 앞에 나타났어요.
그러자 그녀가 말했어요.
“당신은 세상 모든 나무와 잎사귀 위를 불어 다니시니, 혹 흰색 비둘기 한 마리 날아가는 걸 못 보셨나요?”
“그래요,”라며 밤바람(=북풍)이 말했어요. “어떤 것도 못 보았소, 대신 다른 세 강풍들에게 물어보리다. 그들이라면 혹시 비둘기를 보았을지 모르거든요.”
동풍과 서풍이 날아왔어요. 하지만 그들은 아무것도 본 적이 없다고 말했어요.
하지만 남풍은 이렇게 말했어요.
“그 흰 비둘기를 내가 막 봤어. 그 비둘기는 ‘홍해’(아프리카와 사우디아라비아 사이의 좁고 긴 바다)로 날아갔어요. 거기서 다시 사자로 변했고요. 왜냐면 7년이 지났으니까요. 거기서 사자는 용과 싸우고 있어요. 하지만 그 용은 마법에 걸린 공주님이랍니다.”
그때 밤바람(=북풍)이 그녀에게 말했어요.
“내가 네가 조언하자면, 홍해로 가거라, 그럼 오른쪽 모래톱에 키가 엄청 큰 갈대가 몇 개 있을 거야, 그 개수를 세려 딱 일곱 번째 갈대를 끊어서 그걸로 용을 내려치거라. 그럼 사자가 그 용을 제압할 수 있을 거야. 그런 다음이면 사자와 용 둘 다 원래 사람의 모습으로 돌아올 거란다. 그 후 주변을 둘러보면 홍해에 있는 ‘그리핀’(사자 몸통에 독수리의 머리와 날개를 한 그리스 신화 속 동물. 그림링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/b4IVdw )이 보일 게야. 그럼 네 연인과 함께 그(그리핀)의 등에 타거라. 그 새가 너희들을 바다 건너 본래 집으로 데려다 줄거야. 다만 너를 위해 이 호두를 줄 테니까, 바다 한 가운데를 날아갈 때쯤 이 호두를 떨어뜨려야해 그럼 즉시 그 호두가 즉시 자라 키 큰 호두나무로 자라 물 위로 자라오를 거고 그럼 그리핀도 잠시나마 바다 위에서 휴식을 취할 수 있을 거란다. 왜냐면 그리핀이 잠시라도 쉬지를 못하면 너희 둘을 업고 바다를 건너기엔 충분히 강인하지 못하거든. 호두를 바다에 떨어뜨리는 걸 꼭 잊지 마, 안 그럼 너희 모두 바다에 떨어지고 말 거야.”  
그래서 그녀가 거기로 가 보니, 정말 밤바람(북풍)이 말한 모두 그대로였어요.
그녀가 바닷가 옆에 있던 갈대들을 세려 정확히 일곱 번째 것을 잘라 그걸로 용을 내려치니 정말 사자가 그 용을 제압할 수 있었어요.
그 후 용과 사자 둘 다 즉시 마법에서 풀려 사람의 모습으로 돌아왔어요.
하지만 용의 예전 원래 모습은 마법에 걸린 공주님이라 말했잖아요, 그녀가 마법에서 풀려나자마자 두 팔로 그 젊은이(왕자님)를 감싸 안더니 그리핀의 등에 타고 훌쩍 자신의 성으로 떠나버렸어요.
이 바람에 연인을 위해 오랜 기간을 방랑해 이제 막 위안을 받으리라 기대했던 가련한 처녀만 덩그러니 홀로 서 있게 되었답니다.
그녀가 자포자기 심정이 되어 주저앉아 울고 말았어요.
하지만 결국 다시 용기를 내고 말했어요.
“바람이 불어가는 데까지 멀리, 그리고 수탉이 우는 오래, 걷고 또 걸어 그 이를 다시 찾고 말 테야.”
그녀가 오래, 정말 오래 길을 걸어, 공주와 왕자가 함께 살고 있는 성에 도착했어요.
그녀가 막 도착해보니 큰잔치가 막 열리려고 하고 있었고 결혼식이 거행될 거라는 거예요.
하지만 그녀는 말했어요.
“하느님이 아직 나를 도우셔.”
그녀가 해님에게서 받은 작은 상자를 열어보았어요.
그 안엔 해님처럼 눈부신 드레스가 한 벌 들어 있었어요.
그래서 그녀는 그 옷을 꺼내 입은 다음 성으로 올라갔어요.
그러자 모두가, 심지어 신부자신마저, 그녀를 경탄해마지 않은 눈으로 바라보았어요.
그 드레스가 신부의 마음에 속 들었기에, 자신의 결혼식 옷으로 입으면 좋겠다 생각하고서, 그녀에게 팔 수 있느냐고 물었어요?
“돈이나 토지를 받고는 안 팔아요,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “하지만 살과 피로는 팔아요.”
신부가 그게 무슨 말이냐고 물었어요.
그래서 그녀가 말했어요.
“신랑이 주무시는 침실에 제가 하룻밤 잘 수 있게 해주세요.”
신부는 그러고 싶지 않았어요, 하지만 그 드레스가 무척이나 탐이 났기에, 결국 동의해주었지요. 하지만 신부는 ‘시동’(심부름 하는 아이)을 시켜 왕자님에게 수면제 물약을 주게 했어요.
그리하여 밤이 되었을 때는 그 젊은이(왕자님)는 이미 잠이 든 상태였어요.
그것도 모르고 침실로 인도받은 그녀는 그의 침대 옆에 자리 잡고 앉아서 말했어요.
“7년 동안 당신을 쫓아다녔어요, 해님도 만나고 달님도 만났어요. 네(4) 바람님도 만나 당신에 대해 물었지요. 그분들이 도와주어 당신이 용을 이기게 도울 수 있었어요. 그런데 어떻게 당신은 이런 저를 잊으실 수 있으세요?”
하지만 왕자님은 너무 깊게 잠이 든 상태라 그녀의 목소리가 그냥 밖에 있던 전나무들이 내는 휘파람 소리처럼 들렸답니다. 
그리하여 동이 트자 그녀는 다시 침실 밖으로 데리고 나가졌고 황금 드레스도 포기해야했답니다.
그것이 아무 소용이 없었기 때문에 그녀는 슬퍼 풀밭으로 가 울며 앉아 있었지요.
그녀가 거기 앉아 있는 동안, 문득 달님이 그녀에게 주었던 달걀이 생각났어요.
그래서 그녀가 그걸 열어보니 온통 황금빛인 12마리 병아리와 함께 “꼬꼬” 우는 엄마 닭이 한 마리 나왔어요.
병아리들이 “삐악삐악” 소리를 내며 주변을 뛰어다니 다시 엄마 닭의 날개 밑으로 모여들어 “삐악”거리기 시작했어요. 
도대체 세상 어느 것이 이보다 더 아름다울 수 있었겠어요!
그녀가 자리에서 일어나 그들을 몰고 창밑으로 갔어요.
결국 신부가 창밖으로 고개를 내밀었어요.
작은 병아리들이 그녀의 마음에 무척 들었어요, 그래서 즉시 내려와 팔지 않겠느냐고 물었어요.
“돈과 토지를 받고 파는 게 아니라, 살과 피로 파는 거랍니다. 저를 신랑님이 주무시는 침실에서 하룻밤 묵게 해주시면 드릴게요.”
신부가 말했어요.
“그래.”
신부는 어제 저녁처럼 다시 한 번 그녀를 속일 참이었지요.
하지만 왕자님이 침대에 자러 갔을 때, 시동(심부름 소년)을 불러 밤에 뭔가가 속삭거리며 바스락거리던데 그게 뭐냐고 물어보았지요.
이 말에 시동(심부름 소년)이 모두 말씀드렸어요. 
“어쩔 수 없이 수면제 물약을 드리게 되었어요, 침실에서 주무시는 동안 어떤 불쌍한 아가씨가 몰래 자고 갔었어요. 그리고 오늘 밤에도 수면제 물약을 드리라는 분부를 받았어요.”
왕자님이 말했어요.
“그 물약을 침대 머리맡에 부어버려라.”
밤이 되자, 그녀가 다시 인도되어 왔어요.
그녀가 그동안 자신이 감내해야했던 모든 걸 읊조리기 시작하자마자 왕자님이 그 목소리가 자신의 사랑하는 아내의 목소리란 것을 알고 벌떡 일어나며 소리쳤어요.
“나는 이제야 마법에서 풀려났소! 마치 꿈을 꿨던 거 같소. 왜냐면 그 이상한 공주가 나로 하여금 당신을 잊게 마법을 씌었기 때문이오, 이제 하느님께서 나를 오랜 잠에서 깨어나게 해주셨소, 이 적절한 시기에 말이오.” 
그런 다음 그들 둘은 야밤에 몰래 그 성을 빠져나왔어요.
왜냐면 그들은 공주의 마법사 아빠가 두려웠기 때문이에요. 
그들은 ‘그리핀’(사자 몸통에 독수리의 머리와 날개를 한 그리스 신화 속 동물)의 등에 올라타 ‘홍해’(아프리카와 사우디아라비아 사이의 좁고 긴 바다)를 건넜어요.
홍해를 중간쯤 지났을 때 그녀가 호두를 떨어뜨렸어요.
즉시 키 큰 호두나무가 자라나 새(그리핀)가 휴식을 취할 수 있었어요. 그런 다음 새는 그들을 집까지 데려다주었답니다.
그들은 거기서 키 커고 아름답게 자란 자신의 자식을 다시 만났어요.
그 이후는 그들이 죽을 때까지 정말 아무 탈 없이 행복하게만 살았답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「노래하며 팔짝거리는 종달새」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「노래하며 팔짝거리는 종달새」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter88.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



89. 거위 치는 소녀 (거위 치는 공주)



수년 전에 남편을 잃고 홀로 사는 나이 드신 왕비 한 분이 옛날에 살고 계셨어요.
그녀에게는 아름다운 딸이 하나 있었어요.
공주는 자라 아주 멀리서 사는 왕자님과 약혼을 하게 되었어요.
결혼을 할 때가 가까워져, 그녀가 멀리 떨어진 왕국까지 여행을 떠나야했어요.
나이 드신 왕비님은 값나가는 수많은 금은 식기들을 싸주고, 금은 장식품들과 컵들과 보석들, 즉 왕족의 신부 지참금으로 합당한 모든 걸 싸주었어요. 왜냐면 그녀는 자신의 둘도 없는 딸아이였으니까요.
그녀는 또한 공주 시중을 들 시녀도 딸려 보냈어요.
시녀는 공주와 함께 말을 타고 가서 신랑에게 공주를 인도하는 임무를 부여받았죠.
두 여인에게 여행용 말이 하나씩 지급되었어요.
하지만 공주의 말은 ‘팔라다’(‘평판’이란 뜻임. 네이버 포르투갈어 사전참조 함)라는 말로 사람의 말을 할 수 있었어요.
헤어질 때가 다가오자, 나이 드신 어머님은 자신의 침실로 가더니 작은 칼을 꺼내 손가락을 살짝 베셨어요. 그렇게 떨어진 세 방울의 피를 자신의 새하얀 손수건에 담아서 딸아이에게 주며 말했어요.
“사랑하는 아가야, 이걸 소중히 간직하거라, 이게 너를 인도해줄 것이다.”
그리하여 아쉬운 작별을 뒤로 하고서 공주는 가슴에 그 손수건을 고이 넣어 말에 올라 신랑에게로 향했어요.
말을 타고 잠시 가니 목이 마라진 공주가 시녀에게 말했어요.
“말에서 내려, 결혼식 예물로 네가 지니고 가는 컵을 하나 꺼내, 시냇물에서 물을 좀 떠 오거라, 내가 마시게.”
“목이 마르시면,”라며 시녀가 말했어요. “아가씨가 말에서 내려 납작 엎드려서 퍼마시세요, 그런 일까지 하라고 제가 뽑힌 건 아니잖아요.”
너무도 목이 말랐기에 공주가 말에서 내려 시내물 위로 몸을 숙여 마셨어요. 왜냐면 시녀는 공주가 황금 컵을 꺼내는 것도 허락지 않았거든요.
그때 공주가 말했어요.
“아, 원통하다!”
그러자 세 핏방울이 화답했어요.
“네 엄마가 아신다면 억장이 무너지실 거야.”
하지만 공주님은 겸손했기에, 아무 말씀 안하시고 다시 말에 올라타셨지요.
그녀는 수 킬로미터를 더 말을 타고 갔어요. 하지만 날이 덥고, 햇볕이 살갗을 태우다보니, 그녀가 다시 한 번 목이 정말 말라졌어요.
때마침 시냇물이 나오자, 그녀가 시녀보고 다시 말했어요.
“말에서 내려, 내 황금 컵에 물을 좀 담아 오렴.”
왜냐하면 시간이 많이 되서 시녀에게서 오는 말이 곱지 않았음을 까먹었던 거지요.
역시나 시녀의 말투는 사납기 그지없었어요.
“마시고 싶음, 네가 직접 마셔, 그런 거까지 시녀가 해야 되는지 알아.” 
그래서 너무도 목이 마른 공주가 말에서 내려 흐르는 시냇물에 몸을 숙였어요.
그녀가 울며 말했어요.
“아, 원통하다!”
그러자 세 핏방울이 다시 화답했어요.
“네 엄마가 아셨다면 심장이 찢어졌을 거야.”
하지만 그녀가 시냇물 위로 몸을 숙여 물을 마시다 그만 엄마의 핏방울 세 개가 담긴 그 손수건이 그녀의 가슴에서 떨어져 나와 그녀도 미처 알지 못하는 사이 물에 떠내려가고 말았어요. 
하지만 시녀는 이 모든 걸 다 지켜보고 있었지요. 시녀는 이제 공주를 대신 할 수 있을 거라 생각하곤 기뻤어요. 왜냐면 공주가 핏방울들을 잃어버려 약해지고 권위가 없어졌기 때문이지요.
그래서 공주가 다시 ‘팔라다’(‘평판’이란 뜻임)라 불리는 자기 말에 타려하자, 시녀가 말했어요.
“팔라다는 내게 더 어울려, 네겐 기껏 이 작은 말이 어울리고.”
그래서 공주는 그 작은 말에라도 만족해야했어요.
또한 시녀는 성난 수많은 말을 하며 공주가 입고 있던 왕족의 옷과 자신이 입은 초라한 의복들을 바꿔 입게 했어요. 그리곤 결국에는 궁전에 도착해서도 이 일에 대해 한 마디도 발설하지 않기로 맑은 하늘에 대도 맹세하도록 강요하기까지 했어요. 시녀가 너무도 욕심을 냈기에 만약 그런 맹세라도 하지 않았다면 공주는 그 장소에서 죽음을 당했을 지도 모를 일이였답니다.
하지만 ‘팔라다’(‘평판’이란 뜻. 말 이름)만은 이 모든 사단을 지켜보고 있었더랬죠.
이제 시녀가 ‘팔라다’(말 이름)에 오르고, 진짜 신부가 나쁜 말을 탔어요.
그렇게 그녀들은 계속 여행을 했답니다.
결국 그녀들이 왕궁에 도착했어요.
그곳에선 그녀의 도착에 축제분위기였어요. 왕자가 몸소 마중 나와 시녀를 말에서 안아 내려주었지요. 그녀가 자신의 배우자라 생각했기 때문이지요. 
그녀는 위층으로 인도되어 가고, 진짜 공주는 아래층에 멍하니 선 채로 남아 있었답니다.
때마침 창밖으로 내다보고 있던 나이 드신 왕이 안마당에 서 있는 그녀를 보았는데, 어찌나 우아하고 아름다운지 즉시 숙소로 가 “지금 마당에 서 있는 저 처자가 대체 누구인가?”라고 신부에게 물어보았어요.
“오는 길에 길동무 삼아 데려온 아이입니다. 시키실 일이 있음 뭐든 시켜주세요. 그럼 바보처럼 서 있지 않겠죠.”
하지만 나이 드신 왕은 그녀에게 줄 일거리가 없었어요, 그래서 왕이 말했어요.
“거위 치는 소년을 하나 데리고 있는데 그녀가 그를 도와주면 되겠구먼.”
그 소년의 이름은 ‘콘래드’(남자이름)였어요.
이리하여 진짜 신부는 소년을 도와 거위 치는 일을 돕게 되었답니다.
그 후 곧 가짜 신부는 젊은 왕에게 말했어요. 
“사랑하는 여보, 제게 호의를 하나 베풀어주세요.”
그가 대답했어요.
“뭐든지 말하시구려.”
“사람을 보내 도살업자를 불러주세요, 그 도살업자보고 제가 타고 온 말의 머리를 베게 하려고요, 여행 내내 저를 짜증나게 했거든요.”
실은, 그녀는 자신이 공주인양 행동하고 있는 걸 그 말이 폭로할까봐 두려웠던 거예요.
그녀가 “그리하겠소.”라는 왕의 확답을 얻는데 성공했어요.
그리하여 충실한 ‘팔라다’(‘평판’이란 뜻의 말 이름)가 죽게 되었어요.
이것이 진짜 공주의 귀에까지 들어갔어요.
그녀가 몰래 그 도살업자에게 금화 한 개를 주고 작은 청 하나만 들어 달라 부탁했어요.
그 마을엔 커고 ‘검은’(=북쪽) 성문이 하나 있었어요. 그녀가 거위를 데리고 아침 저녁으로 지나가는 성문이었지요. 그녀가 도살업자에게 부탁해 팔라다의 머리를 그 성문 위에 있는 목에 걸게 했어요. 그렇게 하면 그녀가 말을 다시, 그것도 계속해서 더 많이 볼 수 있을 테니까요.
도살업자가 그녀와의 약속을 지켜, 말 머리를 자른 다음 검은 그것을 성문 밑에 단단히 못 받아두었어요. 
아침 일찍, 그녀와 ‘콘래드’(거위 치는 소년이름)가 한 무리의 거위 떼들을 몰고 그 성문 아래를 지나갈 때면, 그녀가 말했답니다.
“아아, 팔라다, 거기 걸려 있구나!”
그럼 머리가 대답했어요.
“아아, 어린 왕비시여, 팔자 참! 당신의 연약하신 어머님께서 아시면 상심에 심장이 두 동강나실 거예요.” 
그런 다음이면 그들은 마을 훨씬 멀리까지 나아가 들판으로 거위를 몰고 갔답니다.
그들이 풀밭에 도착하면, 그녀는 앉아 황금빛 머릿결이 출렁이는 머리를 풀었지요.
그것을 본 ‘콘래드’(소년이름)가 뛸 듯이 기뻐하며 머리카락 몇 올만 뽑으려고 했어요.
그럼 그녀가 말했답니다.
“불어라, 불어, 산들바람아, 내가 부탁하노니, 콘래드(소년이름)의 작은 모자를 날려 보내 이리저리 뒤쫓아 다니게 해주려무나. 내가 머리를 다 땋은 다음 다시 묶어 올릴 때까지.”
그러자 세찬 바람 하나가 불어오더니 ‘콘래드’(소년이름)의 모자를 저 멀리 떨어진 들판으로 날려버렸어요. 그래서 소년이 모자를 쫓느라 바빴지요.
소년이 다시 돌아왔을 땐 그녀가 이미 머리 빗질을 마치고 다시 올려 묶은 뒤였답니다. 그래서 소년은 한 올도 얻을 수 없었지요.
그래서 ‘콘래드’(소년이름)는 화가 나 그녀에게 한 마디도 하지 않았어요. 그렇게 그들은 저녁 무렵까지 거위를 ‘친’(돌본) 다음 집으로 돌아왔어요.
다음날 그들이 다시 그 검은 성문을 거위를 몰고 지나갈 때 처녀가 말했어요.
“아아, 팔라다, 거기 걸려 있구나!”
‘팔라다’(말 이름)가 대답했어요.
“아아, 어린 왕비시여, 팔자 참! 당신의 연약하신 어머님께서 아시면 상심에 심장이 두 동강나실 거예요.” 
그녀가 다시 들판에 앉아 머릿결을 빗기 시작하자, 콘래드(소년이름)가 달려와 머릿결을 쥐려했어요, 그러자 그녀가 서둘러 말했지요.
“불어라, 불어, 산들바람아, 내가 부탁하노니, 콘래드(소년이름)의 작은 모자를 날려 보내 이리저리 뒤쫓아 다니게 해주려무나. 내가 머리를 다 땋은 다음 다시 묶어 올릴 때까지.”
그러자 강풍이 불어와 그의 모자를 머리에서 벗겨 저 멀리 날려버려, 콘래드(소년이름)가 모자를 쫓느라 한참을 뛰어야했어요.
소년이 다시 돌아왔을 땐 그녀가 이미 한참 전에 머리를 묶어 올린 뒤였죠. 
그래서 소년은 이번에도 그녀의 머리카락 한 올도 얻을 수가 없었답니다.
그렇게 그들은 저녁이 될 때까지 거위들을 돌보았어요.
하지만 저녁에 집에 도착했을 때, 콘래드(소년이름)는 나이 드신 왕에게로 가 말했어요.
“저는 저 소녀와 더는 거위를 치기 싫습니다!”
“아니 왜?”라며 나이 드신 왕이 물었어요.
“오, 오늘처럼 하루 종일 저를 짜증나게 하는 일을 반복하니까요.”
그래서 나이 드신 왕은 그녀가 그에게 어찌했는지 소상히 말해보라 시켰어요.
콘래드(소년이름)가 말했어요.
(소년의 대사 시작→) “아침에 거위 떼를 몰고 ‘검은’(=북쪽) 성문 밑을 통과할 때면, 불쌍한 말 머리 하나가 벽에 걸려 있는데, 그녀는 거기다 대고 말하길,
‘아아, 팔라다, 거기 걸려 있구나!’라고 해요.
그럼 그 머리가 대답하기를,
‘아아, 어린 왕비시여, 팔자 참! 당신의 연약하신 어머님께서 아시면 상심에 심장이 두 동강나실 거예요.’라고 하고요.” (←소년의 대사 끝)
그런 다음 콘래드(소년이름)는 거위 목장에서 무슨 일이 벌어졌고, 그래서 자신이 모자를 뒤쫓아야했다는 얘기도 들려드렸어요.
나이 드신 왕은 소년보고 내일 한 번 더 거위 떼를 몰고 가보라고 지시했어요.
그리고 다음날 아침이 되자마자, 왕은 몸소 검은(북쪽) 성문 뒤에 자리해 그 처자가 ‘팔라다’(말 이름)의 머리에게 뭐라 말하는지 들었어요. 그런 다음 왕도 또한 들판으로 가 풀밭 우거진 곳에 숨었어요.
곧 왕의 눈에 거위 치는 소녀와 거위 치는 소년이 한 무리의 거위 떼를 이끌고 오는 게 보였고, 잠시 후 그녀가 앉아 황금빛으로 물결치는 머리카락을 풀어헤쳤어요.
그녀가 곧 말했답니다.
“불어라, 불어, 산들바람아, 내가 부탁하노니, 콘래드(소년이름)의 작은 모자를 날려 보내 이리저리 뒤쫓아 다니게 해주려무나. 내가 머리를 다 땋은 다음 다시 묶어 올릴 때까지.”
그러자 정말 강풍이 불어와 콘래드(소년이름)의 모자를 날려버려, 소년이 한참을 뛰어다니며 모자를 뒤쫓아야했어요. 그러는 사이 그 처녀는 머리를 빗고 머리를 땋았죠. 이 모든 광경을 왕이 지켜보았답니다.
그런 다음 왕은 그들이 눈치 못 채게 거길 떠났어요.
저녁에 거위 치는 소녀가 집에 도착하자, 왕이 그녀를 따로 불러 오늘 이 모든 게 어인 일인지를 물었어요.
“말씀드릴 수 없어요, 어떤 사람(시녀)에게 제 비애를 발설하지 않겠다고 저 위 하늘에다 대고 맹세했거든요. 혹 제가 한 마디라도 했다가는 전 목숨을 잃을 게 분명해요.”
왕이 타일러보았지만 그녀를 안심시킬 수 없었고, 왕도 그녀로부터 아무 얘기도 들을 수 없었어요.
그러자 왕이 말했어요.
“만약 네가 내게 말하기가 꺼려진다면, 저기 철제 난로로 가서 네 비애를 털어놓아 보거라.”
그리곤 왕은 자리를 떴어요.
그런 다음 그녀는 그 철제 난로로 몰래 다가가 울며 슬퍼하며 자신의 진심을 모두 털어놓으며 말했어요.
“여기선 온 세상이 나를 버린 거 같지만, 그래도 난 아직 왕의 딸이야, 가짜 시녀가 내 공주 옷을 빼앗고 내 신랑님과 내 지위를 차지했어, 그래서 난 시녀인 척하고서 거위 치는 소녀 일을 해야 하지. 만약 내 엄마가 이 사실을 아시면, 마음이 찢어지실 거야.” 
하지만 나이 드신 왕은 난로의 관(파이프) 밖에 서서 그녀가 말하는 것을 모두 듣고 있었어요.
그런 다음 그가 다시 돌아와 그녀보고 난로에서 나오라 말했어요.
그리곤 왕족의 옷을 가져오게 해 그녀에게 입어보게 했더니, 세상에 어쩜 이리도 아름다운 아가씨가 다 있을까요!
나이 드신 왕이 자신의 아드님을 호출하더니, 그가 얻은 가까 신부는 단지 시녀이며, 지금 여기 서 있는 여인, 이전에 거위를 쳤던 소녀가 진짜 신부라고 말해주었어요.
젊은 왕은 그녀가 아름답고 젊었기에 진심 그 말이 기뻤어요. 곧 큰 잔치 준비를 하곤 모든 사람들과 모든 좋은 친구들을 초대해 불려 들였어요.
테이블의 제일 윗자리엔 공주님이 옆에 앉힌 신랑이 앉았고, 공주 반대편엔 시녀가 앉았어요. 
이때 시녀는 상황을 전혀 눈치 채지 못했는데, 이유는 공주가 너무도 눈부시게 단장을 하고 있어서 미처 그녀를 알아보지 못한 거지요.
그들이 다 먹고 마시고 흥겨워졌을 때, 나이 드신 왕이 시녀에게 수수께끼를 하나 낼 테니 알아맞혀보라고 하셨어요. 응당 그렇고 그런 방식으로 자신의 주인에게 처신한 사람이 하나 있는데, 지금까지 이런 일들이 있었단다, 그럼 이제 이 죄인에게 상응하는 판결은 어떠해야 하겠느냐?, 라는 것이었죠. 
그러자 가짜 신부가 말했어요.
“그녀를 완전히 빨가벗긴 다음, 안에 뾰족한 못들이 온통 박혀 있는 통 속에 집어넣고, 새하얀 말 두 필로 그녀가 든 그 통을 한 길에서 다른 한 길까지 그녀가 죽을 때까지 질질 끌게 하면 돼요.”
“그건 바로 너다.”라며 나이 드신 왕이 말했어요. “네가 네 자신의 형에 대한 판결을 내렸으니, 넌 이제 그와 같이 될 것이다.”
그 형벌이 완료되었을 때, 젊은 왕은 자신의 진짜 신부와 결혼했어요, 그 둘은 평화롭고 행복하게 자신들의 왕국을 다스렸답니다.    
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「거위치는 소녀(공주)」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「거위치는 소녀(공주)」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter89.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



90. 어린 거인



옛날에 엄지손가락만한 크기에서 머리카락 하나의 폭만큼도 더는 더 자라지 않는 아들을 둔 농민이 한 명 살고 있었어요.
한번은 아빠가 밭을 갈러 가려하자, 자그마한 아이가 말하길,
“아빠, 저도 따라갈게요.”
“네가 가서 뭐하게?”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “여기 머물거라, 거기 가도 도움도 안 되고, 게다가 잃어버리기라도 하면 어쩌려고!”
엄지둥이가 울기 시작하는 바람에, 아빠는 집안의 평화를 위해 그를 호주머니에 넣고 밭으로 데리고 갔어요.
밭에 온 아빠는 아들을 다시 꺼내 방금 만든 ‘밭고랑’(홈이 진 곳)에 내려놓았어요.
그가 거기 있는 동안, 어떤 거대한 거인이 언덕을 넘어왔어요.
“저 큰 경찰관님 너도 보이지?”라며 아빠가 말했어요. 아빠는 그냥 아들에게 교육적인 훈시를 하려고 살짝 겁을 주려던 거 뿐이었거든요. “나쁜 짓하면 널 잡으러 오신단다.”
하지만 거 진자 거인이 어찌나 큰 지 단 두 걸음 만에 이미 밭고랑(움푹 들어간 곳)에 있던 엄지둥이 앞에 도착했어요.
그가 두 손가락으로 엄지둥이를 조심스럽게 쥐어 살펴보더니 한 마디 말도 없이 그를 데리고 가 버렸어요.
이에 너무도 공포에 질린 나머지 아빠는 우두커니 서 있다, 결국 자식 하나 잃은 걸로 생각할 수밖에 없었지요. 아마 살아 있는 동안엔 아들을 두 번 다시 볼 수 있을지 알 수 없었으니까요.
하지만 거인은 엄지둥이를 집으로 데리고 가 젖을 먹여주었어요.
그래서 엄지둥이는 무럭무럭 키도 크고 체력도 강해졌지요. 거인의 보살핌 아래 말이죠.
그렇게 2년이 흐른 어느 날, 나이 든 거인이 그를 데리고 숲으로 가 시험을 해보고 싶어 말했어요.
“너 자신을 위해 이쑤시개 하나 만들어보거라.”
그러자 소년이 “우짖건”하며 어린 나무 하나를 뿌리 채 뽑아 강인함을 보여드렸어요.
하지만 거인은 생각했지요.
‘아직 멀었다.’
그래서 거인은 소년을 다시 데리고 집으로 가 2년을 더 젖을 먹이며 키웠어요.
거인이 다시 시험을 시키자, 엄지둥이는 늙은 나무 하나를 땅에서 “우짖건” 뽑아 자신의 강인함을 증명해보였어요.
하지만 이것도 아직 거인이 보기에 성이 차지 않았지요. 그래서 거인은 그를 다시 집으로 데려가 2년을 더 젖을 먹이며 키웠어요.
때가 되자 그가 다시 엄지둥이를 데리고 숲으로 가 말했어요.
“자 네가 사용할 알맞은 막대기를 하나 뽑아 보거라.”
소년이 가장 강한 떡갈나무를 땅바닥에서 “우짖건” 뽑는데 보아하니 별로 힘이 드는 것 같지도 않았어요.
“이젠 됐다.”라며 거인이 말했어요. “넌 이제 다 배웠다.”
그리하여 거인이 그를 처음 데려왔었던 그 밭으로 데리다 주었어요.
때마침 거기에서 아빠가 밭을 갈고 있었지요.
어린 거인이 아빠에게 가 말했어요.
“아빠, 저도 이젠 건장한 ‘장정’(기운 좋은 남자)이 다 됐지요?” 
아빠가 깜짝 놀라 말했어요.
“아니다, 넌 내 아들이 아니다. 썩 가주시오!”
“진실로 저는 당신의 아들입니다. 제가 일을 하게 해주세요. 저도 이제 아빠보다 잘은 아니지만 아빠만큼은 밭을 갈 수 있다고요.”
“아니, 아니래도, 넌 내 아들이 아니다. 밭을 안 갈아도 되니 썩 가거라!”
하지만 아빠는 이 거인 남성이 무서웠기에, 그가 밭을 갈게 놔두고, 밭 한 구석으로 물러나 서 있었어요.
그러자 젊은이가 쟁기를 집어 들더니, 한 손에 ‘쟁기’(말이나 소가 끄는 삼각형 기구)를 쥐고 땅을 한 번 확 밀었지요. 그랬더니 원체 강한 힘이었던지라 쟁기가 그만 땅 속 깊이 박히고 말았어요. 
이 어설픈 동작을 보다 못한 농부(아빠)가 그에게 큰 소리로 말했어요.
“밭을 제대로 갈려거든, 무식하게 힘으로 밀기만 해선 안 된다, 그럼 동작이 어설퍼져.”
하지만 그 젊은이는 말들의 ‘마구’(말을 부리는 데 사용하는 기구)를 풀더니, 자신이 직접 쟁기를 끌면서 말했어요.
“집에 가 계세요, 아빠, 여긴 제게 맡기고, 집에 가셔서 엄마보고 접시 한 가득 음식이나 좀 해놓으라 하세요, 그동안 제가 밭일은 다 해놓을게요.”
그래서 아빠는 집으로 가 아내보고 음식 마련을 시켰어요.
하지만 그 젊은이는 단 혼자서 ‘8000제곱미터’(=2448평=2에이커)나 되는 밭을 다 갈았답니다. 게다가 놀라운 것은 그뿐만이 아니었어요. 젊은이는 이번엔 ‘써레’(바닥을 고르는 농기구. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/wDIarp )의 줄을 몸소 몸에 감더니 땅 전체를 혼자 다 고르 폈을 뿐만 아니라 동시에 써레 두 개를 끌고 작업을 하였답니다.
젊은이는 일을 다 마치고 숲으로 가더니 떡갈나무 두 그루를 잡아 뽑아 자신의 어깨 위에 메고는, 나무 한 쪽 끝엔 ‘쟁기’(밭을 가는 삼각형 농기구)를 매고, 또 한 쪽 끝엔 말 한 마리를 메곤 부모님이 살고 계신 집으로 돌아갔는데, 마치 그가 한 무더기의 밀짚을 이고 가는 것만 같이 보였답니다.
그가 마당에 들어서니, 엄마가 아들을 못 알아보고 물었어요.
“세상에나 저 엄청 키 큰 남자가 누구시래요?”
농부가 말했어요.
“저건 우리 아들이오.”
그녀가 말했어요.
“저게 우리 아들일 수 없어요. 우리 아들은 저렇게 키가 커지 않았다고요, 작았단 말예요.”
그녀가 젊은이에게 말했어요.
“썩 가세요, 우린 당신이 여기 있길 원치 않아요!”
젊은이는 말없이 자신의 말들을 마구간에 넣고 말들에게 ‘귀리’(벼와 비슷하게 생김. 사진링크 ▶ http://me2.do/xm86yGfK )와 건초 더미를 먹였어요.
그렇게 말들이 바라는 걸 다 해준 다음, 젊은이가 거실로 들어가더니 긴 의자에 앉으며 말했어요.
“엄마, 밥 먹고 싶어요, 주실 수 있으세요?”
그래서 그녀가 말했어요.
“그래.”
그녀가 두 접시에 한 가득 음식을 담아 가지고 왔어요. 그건 남편과 그녀가 1주일 동안 배부르게 먹을 만큼의 식사량이었어요.
하지만 젊은이는 그걸 혼자 다 먹더니 더 없으시냐고 엄마에게 물었어요.
“없는데.”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “이게 우리가 가진 음식 다에요.”
“입맛만 다셨는데, 더 필요한데.”
그녀는 감히 그에게 이의를 제기하진 못하고 나가더니 음식이 가득 든 큰 가마솥에 불을 붙여 음식을 준비해 들고 오며 말했어요.
“이제야 부스러기 몇 개 먹네.”라며 그가 말하더니 몽땅 다 먹어치워 버렸어요. 그래도 역시 허기가 진 건 어쩔 수 없었어요.
그래서 그가 말했어요.
“아빠, 여기선 제가 충분히 먹질 못하겠어요. 만약 아빠가 저를 위해 강한 철 막대기, 제 두 무릎으로도 부서뜨릴 수 없는 철 막대기를 하나 구해다주신다면 제가 세상에 한 번 나가보려고요.”
농부는 그 말이 기뻐 자신의 두 말에 ‘달구지’(짐수레)를 매고 대장간으로 가 두 말이 간신히 옮길 수 있는 커고 두꺼운 쇠막대기를 하나 가져왔어요.
그걸 젊은이가 두 무릎에 넣더니 툭 부러뜨려버렸어요, 그냥 툭 요! 마치 콩줄기 마냥요. 그러더니 휙 던져버렸죠.
아빠가 이번엔 말 네 마리에 마구를 메고 나가, 네 마리 말들이 간신히 끌고 올 수 있는 길고 두꺼운 쇠막대기를 가져왔어요.
그것마저 아들은 두 무릎에 끼곤 툭 부러뜨리더니 휙 내던지며 말했어요.
“아빠, 도움도 안 되는 건만 자꾸 가지고 오세요. 좀 더 말을 끌고 가보세요, 더 강한 쇠막대기가 필요하다고요.”
그래서 아빠가 여덟 마리 말을 끌고 가, 여덟 마리 말들이 간신히 끌고 있는 아주 길고 두꺼운 쇠막대기를 구해 가지고 돌아왔어요.
아들이 그걸 손에 쥐더니, 그 꼭대기 끝 부분만 조금 힘을 줘 떼어내더니 말했어요.
“아빠, 어떻게 된 게 제가 쓰고 싶다는 지팡이 하나 조달해주시지 못하세요, 아무래도 여기서 더는 아빠와 지낼 순 없으려나 봐요.” 
그래서 그는 길을 떠났어요. 자신을 대장장이의 견습공이라 밝혔죠.
그가 어느 마을에 도착했는데, 그 마을의 대장장이가 무척이나 탐욕스러운 사람이었어요. 누구에게도 친절을 배푼 적이 없는 자였죠. 그러면서도 모두 자기 차지가 되야 속이 시원한 자였어요.
젊은이가 그 대장장이에게 가서 솜씨 좋은 일꾼이 필요치 않느냐고 물었어요.
“물론,”라며 그 대장장이가 말하더니, 그를 흩어보며 생각했어요.
‘이 자라면 일 깨나 하겠는데, 밥벌이 좀 하겠어.’
그래서 그가 물었어요.
“그래 월급으로 얼마를 생각하고 있나?”
“한 푼도 안 줘도 됩니다.”라며 그가 대꾸했어요. “다른 직공들 임금 주실 때, 저는 그냥 제 2주치 월급으로 두 방만 ‘먹일’(때릴) 테니 당신이 견디시면 됩니다.”
구두쇠가 그 소리를 반갑게 들었어요, 돈을 벌었다 생각한 거죠.
다음날 아침 이상한 직공은 일을 시작했어요. 주인이 작열하는 쇠막대기를 가져오자, 젊은이가 한 방 탁 때렸어요. 그랬더니 철이 두 동강이 나 날아가고, ‘모루’(쇠 받침대)가 땅 깊이 박혀 두 번 다시 꺼낼 수 없게 되고 말았죠.
이 일로 구두쇠가 엄청 화가나 말했어요.
“오, 이걸 어쩔 거야, 네가 너무 세게 쳐서 이리 되었잖아, 그게 네가 말한 한 방이냐?”
그때 그가 말했어요.
“당신에게 살짝만 한 방 날릴 테니 그리 압쇼.”
그가 다리를 들더니 구두쇠를 걷어찼더니 건초더미 위로 휙 날아 가버렸어요.
젊은이는 대장간에서 자신에게 맞는 가장 굵은 철봉하나를 꺼내 지팡이 대신으로 사용하기 위해 손에 쥐곤 길을 계속 떠났어요.
그가 한 참을 걸어가니 작은 농장이 하나 나오기에, 우두머리 하인이 필요치 않느냐고 ‘관리인’(토지 관리인)에게 물어보았답니다.
“맞아,”라며 관리인이 말했어요. “때마침 한 사람 필요했소. 보아하니 자네가 힘깨나 쓸 거 같은데, 그래 1년 치 연봉으로 얼마를 원하나?”
그는 전혀 임금을 원하지 않는다고 또다시 말해주곤, 대신 1년마다 자신이 그를 세 대만 때릴 테니 참기만 하면 된다고 말했어요.
관리인이 엄청 만족했어요. 왜냐면 그도 역시 탐욕스러운 친구였던 거지요.
다음날 아침 모든 하인들이 땔감을 베러 나가는데, 다른 하인들은 벌써 일어났는데, 우두머리 하인만 여전히 침대에 있는 거예요.
그래서 하인들 중 한 명이 그에게 가 말했어요.
“일어나소, 시간이오. 우리가 땔감 베러 갈 때 당신도 가셔야 하오.”
“아아,”라며 그가 거칠고 무뚝뚝하게 말했어요. “당신들이 먼저 가도, 나중 보면 내가 먼저 돌아와 있을 건데 뭘 거래.”
그래서 다른 하인들이 관리인에게 가 우두머리 하인이 여전히 자고 있고 자신들과 땔감을 베러가지 않으려한다고 일러바쳤어요.
관리인이 그들보고 다시 가서 그를 깨우라 말했어요. 그리고 말들에 마구도 채우라 전하라 했고요.
하지만 우두머리 하인은 전처럼 똑같은 말만 했어요.
“당신들 먼저 가도 된다니까. 나중 보면 내가 먼저 돌아와 있을 거야.”
그리하여 그는 2시간을 더 침대에 누워 잤어요.
결국 그도 이불 속에서 일어나, 우선 헛간의 다락에서 완두콩 ‘56킬로그램’(원문→2부셀)을 직접 담아와 묽은 수프로 만들어 냠냠 먹었어요. 
다 먹은 다음 말들에 마구를 채우고 땔감을 베러 숲으로 말을 몰고 갔지요.
숲에서 멀지 않은 곳에 반드시 지나가야하는 산골짜기가 하나 있었어요.
그래서 그가 우선 말만 타고 지나간 다음, 말을 메 놓고 다시 달구지만 자신이 끌고 지나간 다음, 나무들과 나뭇가지들을 가져와 장애물을 크게 하나 만들어 다른 말들이 못 지나가게 했어요.
그가 숲에 들어섰을 때, 다른 이들이 달구지에 땔감을 잔뜩 싣고서 집으로 가려고 하고 있었지요. 
그가 그들에게 말했어요.
“어서들 가, 그래도 내가 먼저 집에 도착할 테니까.”
그는 숲 속 깊이 갈 필요도 없었어요. 그냥 바로 곁에 있던 가장 큰 나무 두 그루를 단번에 뿌리 채 뽑아 달구지에 던져 넣곤 방향을 돌려 집으로 향했죠.
그가 장애물도 가보니, 다른 하인들은 여전히 거기 서 있고 통과할 방법을 몰라 하고 있었죠.
“그거 봐,”라며 그가 말했어요. “너희들이 나와 함께 했음 잠은 몇 시간 더 자고 집에도 더 빨리 들어갔을 거 아냐?” 
그는 이제 쓸데없이 시간 낭비하고 싶지 않았죠, 그래도 말들이 이 장애물을 지나갈 수 없었기에, 자신의 말들의 마구를 벗긴 다음, 말들을 달구지 위에 올려놓곤, 달구지의 ‘채’(수례 양쪽 옆에 길게 댄 나무)를 두 손으로 잡더니 자신이 직접 한꺼번에 왕창 달구지를 끌어당겨 장애물을 지나갔어요. 그에게 그게 정말 깃털보다도 더 가벼운 모양이었어요.
그가 다 마친 다음, 다른 하인들에게도 말했어요.
“어이, 봤지, 내가 너희들보다 더 빠를 거라 했잖아.” 
그리곤 말을 몰고 가버렸고, 다른 하인들은 멀거니 그냥 거기 계속 서 있어야 했지요.
안마당에 도착한 그가 손에 나무 한 그루를 집어 관리인에게 보여주며 말했어요.
“이거면 괜찮은 땔감이 한 움큼 나오지 않소?”
그때 관리인이 자신의 아내에게 말했어요.
“일 잘하는 하인이 하나 있는데, 잠은 다른 하인들보다 더 자면서, 집엔 훨씬 더 일찍 와.”
그런 식으로 젊은이는 관리인에게 1년을 봉사했어요.
1년이 다 되고, 다른 하인들이 임금을 받아갈 때, 젊은이가 자신도 받을 때가 됐다며 말했지요.
하지만 관리인은 그 젊은이가 날릴 한 방(주먹)이 무서웠어요. 그래서 그럴 수 없는 사정을 설명하며, 차라리 자신이 우두머리 하인이 되어줄 테니 젊은이가 이제부터 관리인이 되라며 간절히 말했지요.
“아니,”라며 그가 말했어요. “관리인 안 될 라오. 난 원래 우두머리 하인이었으니 그걸로 남을 라오. 우리가 합의했던 거나 어서 해치웁시다.”
관리인은, 젊은이가 바라는 건 뭐든 들어주겠다고 해보았어요, 소용없었어요. 우두머리 하인은 모든 제안에 “아니”라고만 대답했거든요.
그래서 어찌해야 될지 모른 관리인이 통사정을 해 2주일간의 시간을 달라 말했고, 그는 그 사이에 뭔가를 꾸며 빠져나갈 셈이었어요.
우두머리 하인이 이 기간 연장에 동의해주었어요.
관리인이 자신의 모든 부하직원들을 총집합시킨 후 이 문제를 어찌하면 풀 수 있을지 그들의 조언을 구했어요.
부하직원들이 오랜 시간 숙고해본 다음, 마침내 도출해낸 결론은, 우두머리 하인의 생명을 빼앗는 것보다 이 문제 해결에 직빵은 없다는 거였지요. 어차피 그 젊은이가 사람을 파리 목숨처럼 쉽게 죽일 수 있는 자였기에, 관리인이 명령을 내려 젊은이보고 우물에 들어가 청소를 시키고, 젊은이가 우물 아래로 내려가면, 그들이 거기 놓인 맷돌들 중 하나를 젊은이의 머리 위로 굴러 떨어뜨리면 분명 젊은이가 다시는 햇볕을 못 볼 거라는 거지요.  
이 조언이 무척이나 관리인의 마음에 들었어요.
또한 우두머리 하인도 기꺼이 우물 아래로 내려가려했고요.
그가 바닥 아래까지 내려가 서 있는 동안, 그들은 가장 큰 맷돌을 아래로 굴러 떨어뜨렸어요. 그들이 생각하기에 그의 두개골이 분명 쪼개졌으리라 생각했지요.
그런데 그가 소리치는 거예요.
“암탉들 좀 우물에서 쫓아내요, 내가 볼 수가 없잖아.”
그래서 관리인이 외쳤어요.
“쉬-쉬.”
마치 진짜 암탉들을 쫓아내는 척 연기한 거죠.
우두머리 하인이 청소를 마친 다음 기어 올라와 말했어요.
“이 목걸이 예쁘지 않습니까.”
보니 그가 맷돌을 목에 두르고 있었지요.
이제 우두머리 하인이 자신의 보수를 받고자 했어요. 하지만 관리인은 다시 2주일간만 시간을 더 달라 하소연했지요.
그리하여 부하직원들이 다시 모여 논의한 끝에, 우두머리 하인을 유령이 출몰하는 방앗간에 보내 야밤에 옥수수를 가루로 만들어오게 하자고 합의를 봤어요. 사실 그 방앗간에 간 사람치고 다음날 아침 살아서 다시 나온 사람이 지금껏 아무도 없었거든요. 
그 제안이 관리인의 마음에 들었어요. 그래서 관리인이 우두머리 하인을 불러 오늘 저녁 당장 옥수수 ‘8자루’(원문→8부셀. 8부셀=224킬로그램)를 들고 방앗간으로 가 오늘 밤 안으로 모두 가루로 만들어오라고 시켰답니다.
그래서 우두머리 하인이 헛간의 다락으로 가 자신의 오른쪽 호주머니에 옥수수 두 자루를 담고, 왼쪽 호주머니에도 두 자루를 담았어요. 그럼 호주머니에만 네 자루잖아요. 다시 두 자루는 등에 메고, 남은 두 자루는 가슴 앞에 메고서, 유령이 출몰한다는 그 방앗간으로 갔답니다.
방앗간 주인이 그보고 낮엔 가루를 만들어도 좋으나 밤엔 안 된다고 말했어요. 왜냐면 그 방앗간에는 유령이 나오기 때문이지요. 밤에 이 방앗간에 들어온 사람치고 아침에 죽지 않은 채로 안에서 발견되지 않은 이가 없었다면서요.
그가 말했어요.
“내가 알아서 할 테니, 당신은 그냥 주무시러나 가세요.”
그런 다음 그가 방앗간 안으로 들어가 옥수수들을 죄다 쏟아 부었어요.
저녁 8시쯤 되어 그가 방앗간 안의 방으로 들어가 긴 의자에 앉았어요.
그가 거기 잠시 앉아 있는데, 벌컥 문이 열리면서, 커다란 식탁 하나가 들어오는 거예요, 그 식탁 위에는 포도주며 구운 고기들이 놓여 있고 각종 맛있는 음식들이 많이 차려져 있었어요. 하지만 그것들 모두 옮기는 사람도 없는데 저절로 나타나는 거예요.
그런 다음 의자들이 착착 배치되고, 들어온 사람은 아무도 없는데, 손가락들이 움직이는 게 그의 눈에 들어왔지요. 손가락들은 나이프(칼)들과 포크들을 사용해 접시들 위에 음식들을 예쁘게 배치했어요. 물론 이 외에 보이는 것은 아무것도 없었지요. 
그도 마침 배가 고팠는데 음식을 보니 먹고 싶어 식탁으로 가 앉은 다음, 그 손가락들과 함께 맛있게 저녁을 먹기 시작했어요.
그가 배부르게 다 먹고 나니, 손가락들 또한 자신들 앞의 접시들을 싹 다 비운 후였지요.
순간 모든 촛불들이 갑자기 꺼지는 바람에 주의가 온통 칠흑 같이 어두워졌어요.
바로 그때 무엇인가가 자신의 ‘귓방망이’(귀의 언저리)를 “퍽”하고 후려치지 뭐예요.
그래서 그가 말했지요.
“이딴 식으로 나오면, 나도 저딴 식으로 돌려줄 거라고.”
그가 두 번째로 귓방망이를 얻어맞자, 그도 사정없이 주먹을 휘둘렀어요.
그런 식의 주먹다짐이 온 밤 계속되었어요.
그는 되갚지 않곤 멀쩡히 가만있지 않았고, 한 대 얻어맞음 그 관심이 헛되지 않게 자신도 상대방을 후려 갈겼지요.
하지만 동이 틀 무렵이 되자 모든 게 잠잠해졌답니다.
방앗간 주인이 일어났을 때, 그가 어떤지 그리고 아직도 무사한지 보고 싶어왔어요.
그때 젊은이가 말했지요.
“배터지게 먹었겠다, 귓방망이도 뺨이 얼얼할 정도로 맞았겠다, 나도 응당 그 만큼 돌려줬지.”
그 말에 방앗간 주인이 기뻐하며, 이제 이 방앗간이 마법의 주문에서 풀려났다고 말했어요. 그러면서 방앗간 주인은 그 대가로 젊은이가 원하는 만큼 돈을 주고 싶다고 제안했지요.
하지만 그는 말했어요.
“돈, 안 가질래요. 지금도 충분한 걸요.”
그리하여 그가 등에 옥수수 가루를 이고 집으로 돌아와, 관리인에게 시키는 일을 다 했으니 이제 자신이 ‘보수’(관리인 세 대 때리기)를 받는데 동의해달라고 말했어요.
이 말을 들은 관리인은 심각하게 불안해져선 아주 그냥 제 정신이 아니었어요.
방안에서 앞뒤로 마구 걷다보니 이마에서 땀방울이 주렁주렁 떨어졌어요.
그가 신선한 공기를 쐬러 창문을 열고 막 느끼려는 찰나, 우두머리 하인이 관리인을 세차게 걷어차는 바람에 관리인이 창문을 통해 공중으로 붕 날아가 버리고 말았어요. 그가 너무도 멀리까지 날아갔기에 어느 누구도 그를 다시 보진 못했답니다.
그러자 우두머리 하인이 이번엔 관리인의 아내에게 말했어요.
“그가 돌아오지 않음, 당신이 나머지 두 대를 맞으시구려.”
그녀가 소리쳤어요.
“아니, 내가 그걸 어떻게 견디라고.”
그러면서 그녀가 다른 창문을 열었어요. 너무 놀란 나머지 이마에 급히 맺힌 땀방울들을 식히려는 목적에서였지요.
그러자 마자 그가 그녀도 또한 세차게 걷어차 그녀가 슝 날아가 버렸어요. 그녀가 더 가벼웠기에 남편보다 훨씬 더 높이까지 올라갔답니다.
그녀의 남편이 소리쳤어요.
“‘일로’(이리로) 와.”
하지만 그녀가 대꾸했지요.
“내가 거리로 못갈 거 같으니, 당신이 일로 와요.”
그들은 그렇게 거기 하늘에 떠서 이리저리 배회한 채 서로에게 다가갈 수 없었지요.
그들이 지금도 여전히 하늘에서 배회하고 있는지 아닌지는 저는 모르겠어요.
하지만 어린 거인이 그 후 자신의 쇠막대기(지팡이)를 집어 들곤 다시 길을 떠났다는 것은 여러분께 확실히 말씀드릴 수 있답니다.

 
(동화 끝)

동화 「어린 거인」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「어린 거인」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter90.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



91. 땅속 요정



옛날 옛적에 매일 정원을 산책하는 세 딸을 둔 부자 왕이 살고 있었어요. 왕은 온갖 종류의 좋은 나무들에 엄청난 애호가였지요. 그에겐 정원에 있는 나무들 중 어떤 것도 소중하지 않은 게 없었어요. 특히나 누구든 그가 아끼는 사과를 따는 사람은 천길 낭떠러지에 떨어지리라 빈 상태였지요.
과일들이 가장 탐스럽게 익는 시기가 찾아오자, 이 나무에 핀 사과들이 새빨간 피처럼 탐스럽게 익었답니다.
세 딸들은 매일 같이 이 나무 아래를 지나가며, 혹시라도 바람이 사과 하나만 떨어뜨려주지 않을지 보고 또 보았지만, 역시나 그런 기회는 오지 않았죠. 사과나무가 어찌나 잘 익었는지 나뭇가지들이 바닥에까지 널어 뜨려지며 사과들의 무게를 견디느라 거의 뿌려지기 일보 직전이었답니다.
이때 막내 공주님이 사과 하나만 정말 따 먹고 싶어서 언니들에게 말했어요.
“아빠는 우리를 너무도 사랑하셔, 그 소원은 낯선 사람들에게만 해당될 거야.”
그 말을 하면서, 막내공주가 커다란 사과 하나를 톡 따 언니들에게 달려가며 말했어요.
“맛 좀 봐봐, 언니들, 내 인생에 이렇게 맛있는 사과는 처음이야.”
그리하여 두 언니들도 그 사과를 조금씩 맛보았지요, 그 즉시 세 공주님들 모두 수탉의 울음을 들을 수도 없을 정도로까지 깊고 깊은 땅속으로 떨어졌답니다.
왕은 정원이며 궁전 안이며 사방을 찾아보게 했지만, 딸들을 찾을 수 없었어요.
그래서 왕은 너무도 상심해, 누구든 자신의 딸들을 데려오는 자에겐 그녀들 중 하나를 주겠노라 약속하셨지요.
그 결과로써 나라 안 수많은 젊은이들이 탐색에 나섰지만 누구도 그녀들의 소식을 가져오진 못했어요. 공주님들이 너무도 착하고 미인들이라 세상 모든 사람들이 그 세 아이들을 사랑했음에도 불구하고요. 
세 젊은 사냥꾼들 또한 길을 나섰지요. 그들은 8일을 돌아다니며 공주님들을 찾아보았죠. 그러다 큰 성에 도착했어요. 안에는 아름다운 방들이 가득했어요. 그 방들 중 하나에 식탁이 차려져 있고 그 위엔 방금 음식을 내놓은 것 같이 김이 모락모락 나는 맛난 음식들이 가득했어요. 그런데 이상하게도 그 성 안엔 보이는 사람도 그리고 들리는 사람도 아무도 없었답니다.
그들은 반나절(6시간)을 기다렸는데도 음식은 여전히 김이 모락모락 나고 있었어요. 결국 그들이 너무 배가 고파 자리에 앉아 먹었어요. 
그들은 이 성에 머물며 살자는 데 합의를 보았답니다.
제비뽑기로 한 명을 뽑아 성에 머물게 하고 나머지 두 사람들은 밖으로 나가 공주를 수소문해보기로 했지요.
그들이 제비뽑기를 했더니 큰형이 걸렸어요. 그래서 다음날 동생들이 수소문하러 나가고, 큰형이 집에 머물고 있었어요.
정오(낮12시)가 되자 작고, 작은 난쟁이 한 명이 오더니 빵 한 조각만 달라고 간청했어요.
그래서 사냥꾼이 거기 있던 빵을 집어 한 덩어리 잘라내 그에게 주려는데, 난쟁이가 그 빵을 떨어뜨리고 말았어요. 
난쟁이는 사냥꾼에게 그 빵을 집어줄 수 있으시겠냐고 물었어요.
사냥꾼이 막 그리하려고 허리를 숙이려는 찰나, 이 난쟁이가 느닷없이 사냥꾼의 머리채를 부여잡더니 실컷 때리는 거예요.
다음날, 둘째가 집에 머물었는데 그의 운명도 크게 다르지 않았죠.
저녁이 되어 두 형제가 돌아오자, 큰형이 말했어요.
“그래, 별 일은 없었니?”
“오오, 아주 최악이었어.”라며 둘째가 말했어요.
이렇게 첫째와 둘째는 자신들이 당한 봉변으로 서로 말하며 기분 나빠했죠.
하지만 그들은 이 일을 막내에겐 말해주지 않았어요. 왜냐면 그들은 막내가 세상 물정에 어둡다며 항상 ‘바보 한스’(한스는 ‘독일사람’이란 뜻임)라 부르며 전혀 예뻐하지 않았거든요.
셋째 날엔 막내가 집에 머물게 되었어요.
그때 작은 난쟁이가 다시 나타나 빵 한 조각만 달라 간청했지요.
젊은이가 빵을 주자, 그 꼬마 요정이 전처럼 그걸 떨어뜨리며, 다시 주워줄 수 있으시겠냐고 물었어요.
그때 한스가 꼬마 난쟁이에게 말했어요.
“뭐! 네가 먹을 거 하나도 줍지 못한다는 거니? 그렇담 넌 빵을 먹을 자격이 없어.”
그랬더니 그 난쟁이가 엄청 화를 내며 주워달라고 막 말했어요.
하지만 사냥꾼은 그러지 않고 그 작은 난쟁이를 붙잡곤 흠뻑 때려주었어요.
그러자 난쟁이가 비명을 지르며 소리쳤어요.
“그만, 그만요, 저를 풀어주시면, 제가 공주님들이 어디 계신지 말씀드릴게요.” 
한스가 이 말을 듣고서 때리던 걸 멈추고 풀어주자, 난쟁이가 말하길, 자신은 땅속 요정이며, 거기엔 자신과 같은 요정들이 천명 이상 산다고 했어요, 그리고 자신과 함께 가면 공주님들이 있는 곳을 보여줄 수 있다고 말했지요.
요정은 한스를 깊은 우물로 데려갔어요. 그 우물 안엔 물이 하나도 없었어요.
요정이 계속 말하길, 
“저는 당신 형들을 잘 아는데 절대 좋은 일을 함께 나눌 만한 사람들이 아니니, 왕의 자녀들을 구하려거든 한스 당신 혼자서 하세요. 두 형들은 공주님들을 구할 수 있다는 소리를 듣고 기뻐할 거예요. 하지만 그들은 위험을 감내할 용의는 없답니다. 일단 한스 당신이 큰 바구니를 구해, 단검(칼)과 종을 들고 바구니 안에 앉아 아래로 내려가 보면, 아래엔 방들이 세 개 있어요, 각 방들마다 공주님이 한 분씩 계세요, 그녀들은 머리가 여럿 달린 용들의 머리들을 빗질해주고 다듬어주고 있답니다, 그러니 한스 당신이 그 용들을 베어야 해요.” 
이 모든 설명을 마친 후, 땅속 요정이 홀연히 사라졌답니다.
저녁이 되어 두 형들이 돌아왔을 때 뭔 일 없었냐고 물었지요.
한스가 말했어요.
“아직까진 아주 좋아. 정오(낮12시)에 한 번도 본 적 없는 땅속 요정이 나타나더니 빵을 한 조각 달래, 그래서 주었더니 떨어뜨리지 뭐야, 그러면서 나보고 그걸 주워 달래기에 한 주어주었더니 막 화를 내며 내가 주워줘야 한다는 거야, 그래서 그 요정을 흠뻑 때려주었더니, 공주님들이 어디에 계신지를 말해주데.”
그러자 두 형들이 아주 화가나 얼굴이 붉으락푸르락 했어요.
다음날 아침 그들이 함께 그 우물로 가, 누가 바구니를 탈 건지 제비뽑기를 했어요. 큰형이 걸렸어요. 큰형이 종을 쥐곤 바구니 안에 앉았어요.
그때 그가 말했어요.
“내가 종을 울리거든, 너희들은 즉시 다시 끌어올려야해.”
그는 잠시 내려가는가 싶더니 종을 울렸고 그래서 그들이 냉큼 그를 다시 끌어올렸다빈다.
다음으로 작은형이 바구니에 올라탔지만, 그도 큰형과 별반 다르지 않았어요.
이제 막내의 차례가 되었어요. 그는 바구니를 타고서 아래로 아래로 내려가 결국 바닥까지 닿았죠.
그는 바구니에서 나와 자신의 단검(칼)을 꺼내들고서 나아가 결국 첫 번째 방문 밖에 서서 안을 엿들었어요.
안에서는 용이 엄청나게 시끄러운 소리로 코를 고는 소리가 들렸어요.
그가 살그머니 문을 여니 공주님 한 분이 거기 앉아 머리가 아홉 개 달린 용을 그녀의 무릎위에 눕히곤 빗질을 해주고 있었어요.
그때 그가 자신의 단검을 치켜들더니 용의 머리를 베어버렸어요. 그렇게 용 머리 아홉 개가 나가떨어졌지요.
공주님이 일어나며 그의 목을 감싸앉고 끌어안으며 연거푸 키스를 해주었어요.
그리고 그녀는 자신의 ‘가슴옷’(=스터머커. 엘리자베스 영국 여왕이 입은 드레스 가슴 부분. 보통 보석과 자수 장식이 있었음. 가슴옷 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/fnIApd )에서 순금 장식을 떼어내 그의 목에 걸어주었어요.
그런 다음 그는 둘째 공주님에게로 갔어요. 그녀는 머리가 다섯 달린 용의 머리를 빗어주고 있었지요, 그는 그녀 또한 구해준 다음, 머리가 다섯 달린 용의 머리를 빗어주고 있던 막내공주님에게로 가 마찬가지로 구해주었어요.
그녀들 모두 기뻐하며 그의 품에 안겨 쉴 새 없이 키스를 퍼부었답니다.
그런 다음 그는 종을 아주 크게 울려, 우물 위에 있는 모두가 듣도록 한 다음, 공주님들을 한 분씩 바구니에 태워 형들이 올리게 했어요.
하지만 마지막으로 자신이 올라갈 차례가 되었을 때, 그는 문득 땅속 요정이 “당신 형들은 절대 좋은 일을 함께 나눌 만한 사람들이 아니에요”라고 했던 말이 생각났어요.
그래서 그는 큰 돌을 하나 들고와 바구니에 담곤 종을 울렸더니, 정말 그 바구니가 반 쯤 올라갔을 때, 부정한 형들이 위에서 끈을 잘라버려 바구니가 돌과 함께 바닥에 떨어지고 말았지요. 그 일로 형들은 막내가 죽었다고 생각하고서 세 공주를 데리고 떠나 버렸어요. 형들은 그녀들에게 아빠 앞에서 자신들이 그녀들을 구했노라고 말하겠다는 약속을 하게 만들었지요.
형들은 그녀들을 데리고 왕(공주들의 아빠)에게 가 각자 결혼상대로 공주 한 명씩을 요구했답니다.
그러는 동안 막내 사냥꾼은 난처해하며 세 방을 이리저리 돌아다녔답니다.
거기서 며칠 어떻게 하나 알아보던 중 결국 벽에 ‘플루트’(피리. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/DGJGyH ) 하나가 걸려있는 걸 보게 되었지요.
그러자 그가 말했어요.
“넌 왜 여기 걸려 있니, 불어주는 사람 하나 없는데?”
그는 그런 다음 용들과 머리들을 찬찬히 들여다보더니 말했어요.
“너희들도 나를 도와줄 순 없겠구나.”
그는 방바닥 표면이 매끌매끌해질 정도로 한참을 방에서 왔다 갔다 했어요.
그러다 마침내 어떤 생각이 머릿속에 떠오른 그가 벽에 걸린 그 플루트를 집어 몇 가닥 불러보았어요.
그 즉시 다수의 요정들이 나타났어요.
그가 한 소절 한 소절 부를 때마다 요정들이 나타났어요.
그는 그 방이 요정들로 가득 찰 때까지 연주를 했어요.
그들이 모두 “바라는 게 뭐죠?”라고 그에게 물었어요.
그래서 그는 “내가 다시 위로 올라가 낮을 보는 거야.”라고 말해주자, 땅속 요정들이 그의 머리카락을 한 올씩 잡더니 다시 땅 위로 올라올 때까지 둥둥 떠올랐어요. 
땅 위로 올라온 그가 즉시 궁전으로 갔더니, 때마침 공주님 한 분의 결혼식이 막 거행되려하고 있었어요.
그는 왕과 세 딸들이 있는 방으로 갔어요.
공주님들은 그를 보자마자 기절해버렸어요. 그런 까닭에 왕이 화를 내며 “저 자를 당장 감옥에 처넣어라.”고 지시를 내렸어요. 왜냐면 왕은 그가 바로 자신의 아이들을 해치려고 했었던 나쁜 자라 여겼던 거지요.
공주님들이 다시 정신을 차렸을 때, 그녀들은 한결 같이 왕에게 “그 분을 풀어주세요.”라고 간청했어요.
왕이 이유를 묻자, 그녀들은 “말씀드릴 수 없어요.”라고 말했어요. 
하지만 아빠는 “그럼 저 난로에다 대고 말해 보거라.”라고 말했어요.
그리곤 그는 밖으로 나가 문에다 귀를 기울여 모든 얘기를 듣게 되었지요.
그런 다음 왕은 두 형을 교수형에 처하라 명해 실행시키고, 막내에게 자신의 막내딸을 주었어요.
그 결혼식에 저도 유리 구두 한 짝을 신고 있었는데요, 돌부리에 부딪히는 바람에 유리 구두가 “땡그랑”하고 쪼개지고 말았답니다. 
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「땅속 요정」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「땅속 요정」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter91.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



92. 황금산의 임금님



아들 하나와 딸 하나 이렇게 두 자녀를 둔 어떤 상인이 살고 있었어요.
자녀들은 둘 다 너무 어려 아직 걷지는 못했어요.
그는 배 두 척에 짐을 가득 싣고 바다로 떠나보냈는데, 그건 그의 전 재산을 투자한 거였죠. 제대로만 되면 큰돈을 벌 수 있었거든요. 그래서 그가 오매불망 소식이 오기만 기다리고 있는데, 아뿔싸 배가 가라앉았다는 거예요, 그래서 부자는 하루아침에 알거지가 되어, 마을 외곽의 밭 하나 외에는 아무 것도 가진 게 없게 되고 말았죠. 
불행을 몰아내고 생각할 시간을 가지기 위해 그가 이 밭으로 가 앞뒤로 왔다 갔다 하는데, 어느 순간 자기 옆에 불쑥 검은 난쟁이가 하나 서 있는 거예요.
난쟁이가 왜 그리 슬퍼 보이냐고 무슨 근심이라도 있느냐고 물었어요.
그래서 상인이 말해주었어요.
“네가 나를 도울 수만 있다면야 당장이라도 말해주겠지만.”
“누가 알아요?”라며 검은 난쟁이가 대꾸했어요. “혹시, 내가 당신을 도울 수 있을지.”
그리하여 상인이, 바다로 보낸 자신의 선박이 가라앉았다는 얘기를 해주며 남은 거라곤 이 밭뿐이란 얘기도 모두 해주었지요.
“걱정 마요.”라며 난쟁이가 말했어요. “당신이 다시 집에 돌아갔을 때 가장 먼저 당신 다리에 몸을 비비는 첫 번째 것을 12년 있다가 이 장소로 가져다주겠다고만 약속해주면, 당신이 원하는 만큼 많은 돈을 가지게 해드리지요.”
상인이 생각했어요.
‘기껏 내 개밖에 더 있겠어?’
자신의 어린 아들은 미처 생각지 못한 거지요.
그래서 상인이 “좋다.”라고 말했고 그 검은 남자에게 서약서도 써주고 손도장도 찍어준 후 집으로 돌아갔답니다.
집에 돌아왔을 때, 어린 아들이 아빠가 온 게 반가워 의자를 집고 아장아장 걸어와 아빠 다리를 꼭 붙잡았어요.
아빠가 깜짝 놀랐지요, 왜냐면 그제야 자신이 무슨 약속을 하고 왔는지 그 심각성을 깨달았기 때문이지요.
하지만 금고에 돈이 안 생기자, 그는 난쟁이의 말을 그냥 흘려듣고 말았답니다.
한 달 후 그가 오래된 주석(=양철) 그릇들을 내다팔 생각으로 다락방으로 올라가보니 거기에 돈이 산더미같이 쌓여있지 뭐예요.
그리하여 상인은 다시 행복해져선 장사를 다시 시작해 곧 이전보다 훨씬 더 큰 부자가 되었어요. 세상을 다 가진 거 같았죠.
한편 어린 아들은 무럭무럭 자라 키도 커고 빈틈없고 영리한 청년이 되었어요.
하지만 약속했던 12년이 다 되어가자, 상인은 다시 근심이 가득하기 시작했고, 얼굴에 그대로 드러날 정도였지요.
하루는 아들이 무엇이 아빠를 그리 괴롭히느냐고 물었더니 아빠는 아무 말도 하지 않으려했어요.
하지만 아들이 계속 묻자 드디어 아빠도 어쩔 수 없다 여겼던지, 예전에 큰 돈을 받는 대가로 아들을 검은 난쟁이에게 데려가기로 약속했다고 말해주었어요.
설상가상 서약서까지 써주고 손도장까지 찍어주었다는 얘기도 해주었지요.
이제 그때 약속한 12년이 다 되어간다는 것도요.
그러자 아들이 말했어요.
“오, 아빠, 마음을 굳게 하세요, 다 잘될 거예요. 말씀대로라면 그 검은 남자가 저를 어찌할 건 아니잖아요.”
아들은 목사님에게 가 축복을 받은 다음, 날짜가 되자, 아빠와 함께 그 밭으로 갔어요.
아들은 원을 하나 그리곤 아빠와 함께 그 원 안에 들어갔어요.
그때 검은 난쟁이가 오더니 나이 든 노인에게 말했어요.
“약속한 걸 가지고 왔겠지?”
아빠는 말이 없었어요. 그러자 아들이 물었어요.
“뭘 원하시는 거죠?”
그러자 검은 난쟁이가 말했어요.
“난 네 아빠와 얘기하고 있다, 네가 끼어들 때가 아니야.”
아들이 대꾸했어요. 
“당신은 내 아빠를 얼버무려 속아 넘겼어요, 어서 그 서약서를 돌려주세요.”
“안 돼,”라며 검은 난쟁이가 말했어요. “내 권리를 포기하지 않을 거야.”
그들이 한참을 그런 식으로 옥신각신하다, 결국 아들이 인간인 아빠에게도 그리고 인간의 적인 난쟁이에게도 속하지 않으니 작은 보트에 태워서 물 흐르는 대로 흘러 보내기로 합의를 봤어요. 다만 보트를 밀 때 아빠가 자신의 발로 밀어서 출발시키기로 했지요. 이제 모든 건 물살에 맡기기로 했어요.
그래서 아들이 아빠와 작별인사를 하고 작은 보트에 올라탔고요, 아빠가 발로 보트를 밀었어요.
보트가 뒤집히는 바람에 배 바닥(용골)이 하늘로 향하고 말았어요.
그래서 아빠는 아들을 잃었다 믿고 쓸쓸한 마음을 뒤로 하고 집으로 돌아왔지요.
하지만 그 보트는 가라앉은 게 아니라 아주 조용히 떠내려간 거였어요. 안에 타고 있던 아들도 안전했고요. 그렇게 그는 한참을 떠내려갔답니다.
마침내 보트가 미지의 강기슭에 가 멈추었어요.
그가 상륙해보니 눈앞으로 아름다운 성이 보였어요. 그가 그 성으로 출발했지요.
성에 들어가 보니, 이건 마법에 걸린 성이었어요.
그는 모든 방을 둘러봤는데, 마지막 방에 닿을 때까지 모두 비어있었어요. 
마지막 방엔 반지에 감겨 있는 뱀 한 마리가 누워 있었어요.
하지만 그 뱀은 사실 마법에 걸린 공주님이었어요. 
그를 본 그녀가 반가워하며 말했어요.
“이제야 오셨군요, 오, 내 구원자여? 전 벌서 12년 동안 당신을 기다리고 있었어요. 이 왕국은 마법에 걸렸답니다, 이제 당신이 풀어주셔야 해요.”
“제가 어떻게요?”라며 그가 물었어요.
“오늘밤 12명의 검은 남자들이 쇠사슬을 몸에 두르고 와선 당신보고 여기서 뭐하느냐고 물을 거예요. 그럼 절대 그들에게 대답을 해주어서는 안 돼요, 그리고 그들이 당신에게 뭘 하든 당신을 괴롭히든 때리든 찌르든 그냥 하게 내버려두세요. 그들은 밤 12시가 되면 소리 소문 없이 사라질 테니까요. 두 번째 날에도 12명의 사람들이 올 거고, 세 번째 날에도 올 거예요, 그리고 네 번째 날에는 그들이 당신의 목을 자를 테지만 모두 밤 12시만 지나면 사라질 사람들이니 참고 견뎌보세요, 여하튼 절대 한 마디도 해선 안 된다는 것만 명심하세요. 그들이 가면 제가 와서 당신을 구해드릴게요. 여기 이 물병에 든 건 생명의 물이에요, 이걸로 제가 당신을 문지르면 당신은 다시 살 수 있고 이전처럼 건강해질 거예요.”
그때 그가 말했어요.
“기꺼이 당신을 해방시켜드리리다.”
모든 것이 정말 그녀 말대로 진행되었어요. 검은 남자들이 그에게 말 한 마디를 시키려고 별 짓을 다 했지요. 세 번째 날이 되자 그 뱀은 아름다운 공주님으로 변해 생명의 물을 가져와 그의 목숨을 되살리셨어요.
그래서 그녀가 그의 품안에 뛰어들어 키스를 하였답니다. 그와 함께 온 성에도 환호와 기쁨의 소리들이 가득했지요.
그들의 결혼식은 성대하게 치러졌고, 그는 황금성의 임금님이 되었답니다.
그들은 함께 행복하게 살았어요.
왕비가 건강한 남자아이를 출산했지요.
그렇게 8년이 지나자, 왕은 자신의 아빠가 생각났어요. 그래서 마음이 흔들렸죠. 왕이 아빠를 방문해보고 싶어 했어요.
하지만 왕비는 그가 가는 걸 허락하지 않으려했어요.
그녀가 말했죠.
“왠지 이 일로 제가 불행해질 거 같아서요.”
하지만 그녀가 동의해줄 때까지 왕은 그녀를 괴롭혔지요.
결국 왕이 고향으로 떠나는 날, 왕비가 그에게 소망의 반지 하나를 건네주며 말했어요.
“이 반지를 당신 손가락에 끼세요. 그럼 당신이 가고 싶은 곳이 어디든 금방 가 있을 거예요. 다만 저를 이 궁전에서 소환해 당신 아버님께 데려가는데 이 반지를 사용하진 않겠다고 약속해주세요.”
그것을 그가 그녀에게 약속해주고, 반지를 손가락에 끼고 고향에 갔으면 하고 소망하니, 그 즉시 그가 아빠가 살고 계시는 마을의 외곽에 도착해 있었어요.
그가 정신을 차리고 마을을 알아본 다음 막 성문을 통과하려는데, 보초병들이 그가 입은 옷이 너무 부자이고 웅장하다며 들여보내 주려하지 않았어요.
그래서 그는 양치기가 양 떼를 보고 있던 언덕으로 올라가 옷을 서로 바꾸어 그 양치기의 옷을 입은 다음 다시 마을로 들어섰어요. 이번엔 아무도 그를 제지하지 않았지요.
그가 아빠에게 도착해 자신이 아들임을 말씀드리려했지만, 아빠는 절대 그 양치기가 자신의 아들일리 없다고 믿으시곤 “내게 한 때 아들이 있었다만 그는 이미 오래전에 죽었소.”라고 말했어요. 다만 아빠는 그가 가난하고 사정이 딱해 보이는 양치기 차림을 하고 있는 게 마음에 걸려 먹을 걸 좀 주었어요.
그때 양치기 자신의 부모님에게 말했어요.
“제가 아들임을 증명해드리겠습니다. 저를 알아볼 수 있는 몸의 자국 같은 게 있지 않았나요?”
“그래요,”라며 그의 엄마가 말했어요. “우리 아들의 오른팔엔 나무딸기 모양의 반점이 하나 있었다오.”
그가 소매를 걷어 올리니 정말 오른팔에 나무딸기 모양의 반점이 나왔어요.
이제 그가 자신들의 아들이라는 것이 분명했지요.
그런 다음 그는 부모님께 자신이 황금성의 임금님이 되었으며, 공주가 자신의 아내이며, 지금은 일곱 살짜리 잘생긴 아들도 하나 있다고 말했어요.
그때 아빠가 말했어요.
“허무맹랑한 소리다. 그런 왕이 왜 하필 구더기 같은 양치기의 외투를 걸치고 있단 말이냐.”
이 말에 아들이 욱 해서 약속도 까먹고 반지를 돌리며 아내와 아들을 여기로 불러달라 소망하고 말았어요.
1초 만에 그들이 소환되자, 왕비는 울며 그를 나무랬어요.
“왜 약속을 저버리시고 저를 불행하게 만드시나요.”
그가 말했어요.
“나쁜 마음을 먹은 게 아니라 내가 생각이 짧았던 거요.”
그는 아내를 달래려고 무던히 애썼어요.
그녀는 일단 마음이 누그러진 척 연기했지만, 마음속으로 큰 상처를 입었어요.
그런 다음 그는 그녀를 데리고 마을 밖 밭으로 가, 자신이 작은 보트를 타고 물살에 떠밀려갔던 시냇물을 보여주었어요.
그러고 나서 그가 말했어요.
“피곤하오, 앉아보시구려, 당신 무릎에 누워 잠시 눈 좀 붙이리다.”
그가 고개를 그녀 무릎에 눕히곤 잠이 들었어요.
그가 잠이 들자, 그녀는 그의 손가락에서 반지를 빼고 그의 고개에서 발을 뺀 다음, 실내화만 남겨놓곤, 아이를 품에 안곤 자신의 왕국으로 돌아가게 해 달라 반지에게 빌었지요.
그가 깨어났을 땐, 홀로 버려져 외로이 누워있는 상태였고, 자신의 아내와 아이는 가버리고, 손가락에 끼고 있던 반지도 사라졌고, 단지 징표로서 실내화만 덩그러니 남아 있었어요.
‘부모님에게로 다시 돌아갈 순 없어,’라며 그가 생각했어요. ‘그랬다간 내가 마법사라고 말하는 꼴이다. 떠나긴 해야 해. 내 왕국에 닿을 때까지 걸어가자.’
그리하여 그가 길을 떠나가는데 세 거인이 서 있는 언덕에 다다르게 되었어요. 그 거인들은 아빠의 유산을 어떻게 나눌지 몰라 서로 논쟁을 벌이고 있던 찰나였어요.
그가 지나가는 것을 본 거인들이 그를 부르더니, 작은 이간들이 재치가 있더라며, 자신들이 유산을 나누는 걸 도와 달라 그랬어요.
유산은 세 가지였어요.
하나는 “나 빼고 모두의 머리가 댕강.”이라고 말하면 말하는 사람을 제외한 모든 사람들의 머리가 땅바닥 위로 떨어지는 검이 하나 있었고요, 두 번째는 그것을 입은 사람이 눈에 보이지 않는 망토가 하나 있었고요, 세 번째는 그것을 신기만 하면 소망하는 즉시 어디든 갈 수 있는 장화 한 짝이었어요.
그가 말했어요.
“그게 쓸모 있나 보게 내게 그 세 가지를 줘 봐요.” 
거인들이 망토를 그에게 주었지요.
그가 그걸 입어보니 정말 보이지 않고 파리로 변해버렸어요.
그런 다음 그가 다시 인간의 모습으로 돌아와 말했어요.
“이 망토는 좋군요. 자 이제 그 검을 내게 줘봐요.”
거인들이 말했어요.
“안 돼, 이건 줄 수 없어. 네가 만에 하나라도, ‘나 빼고 모두의 머리가 댕강.’이라고 말하면 우리 모두 목이 잘리고, 너만 남게 되잖아.”
그럼에도 불구하고 거인들은 그가 나무로만 시험해보겠다는 조건으로 건네주었어요.
그가 나무에 시험해보니, 정말 눈 깜짝할 사이에 나무 한 그루가 ‘짚 한 오라기’ 마냥 댕강 두 조각으로 잘려졌어요.
그가 마찬가지로 장화를 신어보고 싶다고 말하자, 거인들이 말하기를,
“안 돼, 이건 줄 수 없어. 네가 이걸 신고 언덕 꼭대기로 가고 싶다고 빌면, 우리만 덩그러니 빈손으로 남게 되는 거잖아.”
“오, 아뇨,”라며 그가 말했어요. “절대 그러지 않을 게요.”
그래서 이번에도 거인들이 장화를 그에게 건네주었어요.
이 세 가지 모두를 얻었을 때, 그에겐 오직 아내와 자식 생각뿐이었어요, 그래서 혼잣말을 하듯 말했지요.
“오, 내가 황금산에 있었다면.”
그 즉시 그가 유산 세 가지를 다 가지고서 거인들의 눈에서 사라져버렸어요. 그 바람에 유산 나누기도 끝이 나고 말았답니다.
그가 궁전 가까이에 도착해보니, 환호성 소리와 바이올린 소리 그리고 플루트 소리가 가득했어요. 사람들이 그에게 말하길 그의 아내가 다른 남자와 결혼식을 올리고 있다는 거에요.
그렇게 되자 그가 울컥 화를 내며 말했어요.
“이 부정한 여인네가, 내가 잠든 사이 나를 속이고 도망갔던 거였군!”
그래서 그가 망토를 입고 모습을 감춘 후 궁전으로 들어갔어요.
그가 궁전 큰 식당에 들어가 보니 테이블 위엔 갖가지 맛있는 음식들이 가득 펼쳐져 있었고, 손님들은 먹고 마시고 웃고 떠드느라 정신이 없었어요.
그녀는 머리에 왕관을 쓰고 화려한 옷을 입고서 그들 한 가운데에 있는 왕좌에 앉아 있었어요.
그는 그녀 뒤에 섰어요. 아무도 그를 볼 수 없었죠.
그녀가 먹으려고 자기 접시에 고기를 한 조각 담으면, 그가 냉큼 집어다 먹어버렸지요.
그녀가 마시려고 자기 잔에 포도주를 따르면, 그가 냉큼 집어다 마셔버렸지요.
그녀가 뭐 좀 먹으려할 때마다 결국 아무 것도 먹을 수 없었어요. 접시와 잔이 그 즉시 비워지기 때문이지요.
당황스럽고 수줍은 나머지 그녀가 자기 침실로 가 울었어요. 
하지만 그도 그녀를 따라 거기로 갔답니다.
그녀가 말했어요.
“내게 마(마귀)가 꼈나, 이게 어쩐 일이지?” 
그때 그가 그녀의 얼굴을 찰싹 때리며 말했어요.
“어쩐 일 좋아하시네? 내가 너를 마법에서 풀어주었거늘, 이제와 나를 배반해. 그런데도 이게 어쩐 일이란 말이 나와?”
그런 다음 그가 망토를 벗고 모습을 드러내곤 ‘홀’(큰 공간)로 가 소리쳤어요.
“결혼식은 끝났다. 진짜 왕이 돌아왔노라.”
그 자리에 모인 왕들과 왕자들과 의원님들이 그를 비웃고 조롱했어요.
하지만 그는 그들의 말에 일언반구도 없이 단지 이렇게만 말했어요.
“꺼질래, 안 꺼질래?”
이 말에 그들이 그를 붙잡으려 하며 내리누르기 시작했어요.
그러자 그가 자신의 검을 뽑아들며 말했지요.
“나 빼고 모두의 머리가 댕강.”
그 순간 모두의 머리가 바닥에 나뒹굴었어요.
이리하여 이제 그만이 홀로 다시 황금성의 임금님이 되셨답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「황금산의 임금님」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「황금산의 임금님」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter92.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



93. 까마귀



옛날 옛적에 딸이 아직 너무나 어려서 품고 다녀야했던 어느 왕비가 살고 있었어요.
어느 날 아이가 말을 듣지 않고 엄마가 무얼 해도 소용이 없이 가만있질 않았죠.
그래서 엄마는 참을 수 없게 되었어요. 
때마침 궁전 위를 날아가고 있던 ‘까마귀’(까마귀 중에서도 몸길이가 60센티미터쯤 되는 ‘큰까마귀’인, ‘레이븐’을 의미함)들이 보이자, 그녀는 창문을 열고 말했지요.
“네가 까마귀가 되어 훨훨 날아가 주었음 내가 좀 편해지련만.”
그 말이 내뱉어지자마자, 아이는 한 마리 까마귀로 변해 엄마의 품에서 푸드덕 날아올라 창밖으로 사라져버렸어요.
껌껌한 숲으로 날아간 그 까마귀는 오랫동안 거기 머물었고, 그녀의 부모님은 이후 아이에 대한 어떤 소식도 듣지 못하고 말았지요.
그러던 어느 날 한 젊은이가 길을 가다 그 숲을 지나게 되었는데, 어디선가 까마귀 울음소리가 들려와 따라가 보았죠.
그가 다가가자, 그 새가 말했어요.
“저는 왕의 딸로 태어났답니다, 하지만 지금은 마법에 걸리고 말았어요. 당신만이 저를 마법에서 풀어줄 수 있으세요.”
“제가 어떻게요.”라며 그가 물었어요.
그녀가 말했지요.
“숲을 더 들어가시면, 집이 한 채 나올 거예요, 그 집엔 나이 든 노파가 앉아 있을 거고요. 그녀가 당신에게 고기와 술을 주려할 건데, 절대 한 모금도 드시면 안 돼요, 왜냐면 당신이 한 입만 먹든 한 모금만 마시던 그로 인해 깊은 잠에 빠지고 말 테니까요, 그렇게 되면 당신은 저를 구해줄 수 없으세요. 그 집 뒷마당에 떡갈나무 껍질들이 한 무더기 쌓여 있을 텐데, 당신은 그 위에 서서 저를 기다리셔야 해요. 저는 3일 동안 매일 오후 2시에 마차를 타고서 당신을 찾아갈 거예요. 첫 번째 날엔 제가 새하얀 네 마리의 말들이 끄는 마차를 타고 갈 거고, 다음 날엔 밤나무 색 말들이 끄는 마차를, 그리고 마지막 날엔 검은 말들이 끄는 마차를 타고 당신을 찾아갈 거예요. 하지만 그때마다 당신이 깨어있지 않고 잠들어 계시면 저는 자유를 얻을 수 없답니다.”
사내는 그녀가 원하는 대로 해주겠다고 약속했어요.
하지만 까마귀는 말했죠.
“아아, 당신이 저를 못 구하실 거란 걸 저는 벌써 알아요, 당신은 노파가 주는 걸 드실 거거든요.”
그러자 사내가 절대 한 입도 그리고 한 모금도 마시지 않겠다고 한 번 더 약속했어요.
하지만 그가 집에 들어서니 노파가 다가오더니 말하는 거예요.
“이런 불쌍한 사내를 봤나, 엄청 지쳐 있구먼, 자 이것 좀 드시구려. 한 입 마셔봐요.”
“아닙니다.”라며 남자가 말했어요. “저는 한 입도 그리고 한 모금도 하지 않을 거에요.”
하지만 그녀는 그를 놓아주지 않고 또 말했어요.
“한 입도 먹지 않을 거면, 이 잔이라도 한 모금하시구려, 이건데 뭐 어때.”
그 바람에 그는 설득당해 마셨어요.
오후 2시 조금 전에 그가 뒷마당으로 가 떡갈나무 껍질 더미 위에서 그 까마귀를 기다렸어요.
거기 서 있자니 순간 피곤이 밀려오며 도저히 견디질 못하겠는 거예요, 그래서 그가 잠시만 드러누웠지요, 하지만 절대 자진 않을 작정이었지요.
하지만 자리에 드러눕자마자 두 눈꺼풀이 저절로 닫히며 그는 잠이 들었고 그 잠이 너무도 깊다 보니 세상의 어떤 소리로도 그를 깨울 순 없었지요.
2시가 되자 그 까마귀가 새하얀 네 마리의 말들이 끄는 마차는 타고 나타났어요.
하지만 그녀는 이미 큰 슬픔에 잠긴 상태로 말했지요.
“그이가 잠든 걸 알아.”
그가 뒷마당으로 들어서보니, 그는 정말 떡갈나무 껍질 더미 위에 드러누워 잠이 든 상태였어요.
그녀가 마차를 세우고 그에게로 가 흔들어도 보고 불려도 보고 했지만 그를 깨울 순 없었어요.
다음날 정오(낮12시) 때, 그 노파가 다시 오더니 그에게 음식과 술을 주었어요.
그는 받지 않으려 했어요.
하지만 그녀가 한 시도 가만 두지 않고 설득하는 바람에 결국 그가 술 한 모금을 마시고 말았어요.
2시가 다가오자 그가 뒷마당에 있는 떡갈나무 껍질 더미로 갔어요, 하지만 그 위에 서자마자 엄청난 피곤이 몰려와 두 다리로 더는 서 있을 수가 없었지요.
그가 이번에도 어쩔 수 없이 드러누워 무거운 잠에 빠지고 말았어요.
곧 까마귀가 네 마리 갈색 말들이 끄는 마차를 타고 나타났어요, 그녀는 벌써 상심에 빠져 말했어요.
“그이가 주무신다는 걸 잘 알아.”
그녀가 가보니 역시가 그는 누워 자고 있어 아무리 해도 깨울 수 없었어요.
다음날 노파가 와서 “이것 좀 먹어보게?”라고 말했을 때, 그는 정말이지 한 입도 그리고 한 모금도 마시는 걸 거부했어요.
“굶어죽으려고?”
그가 대꾸했어요.
“한 입도 한 모금도 마실 수 없어요, 절대 안 먹을 거예요.”
하지만 노파가 음식을 한 접시 내오고 포도주를 한 잔 따르자, 그 냄새에 그도 더 이상 저항하지 못하고 갈증을 식이고자 쭉 들이키고 말았답니다.
시간이 되자, 그는 뒷마당에 있는 떡갈나무 껍질 더미들 위로 가 공주님을 기다렸어요.
하지만 이번엔 전날들보다 훨씬 더 피곤해 곧 바로 자리에 드러누워 돌처럼 깊은 잠에 빠지고 말았답니다.
2시가 되자 까마귀가 네 마리 검은 말들이 끄는 마차를 타고 나타났지요. 마부와 그 밖의 모든 것이 검정색이었어요.
그녀는 벌써 수렁 같은 상심에 빠진 상태로 말했어요.
“그이가 주무시는 걸 잘 알아, 나를 구할 수 없으실 거야.”
그녀가 그에게 도착해보니, 그는 역시나 꼼짝없이 잠들어 있었어요.
그녀가 그를 흔들어보고 불러도 보았지만 어떻게 해도 깨울 수 없었어요.
그런 다음 그녀가 그 옆에 빵 덩어리 하나를 내려놓았어요, 그 후 고기 한 조각도 내려놓았고, 세 번째로 포도주 한 병도 내려놓았어요. 그건 그가 아무리 배부르게 먹어도 절대 양이 줄어들지 않는 신비의 식량들이었어요.
이런 다음 그녀가 자신의 손가락에서 황금 반지를 하나 빼 그걸 남자의 손가락에 끼어주었어요. 그건 그녀의 이름이 새겨진 황금반지였어요.
그녀는 또한 그 옆에 편지도 한 통 남겨놓았어요. 그녀가 그에게 들려주는 얘기였지요. 한 문장 한 문장에 마음이 담기지 않은 글씨가 하나도 없었죠.
그 편지는 이렇게 적혀 있었어요.
“제가 말씀드렸듯 여기선 당신이 저를 구할 수 없으세요. 하지만 아직도 저를 구해주실 의향이 있으시다면, ‘슈트롬베르크’(독일 서쪽에 있는 도시. 프랑크푸르트 왼쪽. 슈트롬=폭풍. 베르크=산)에 있는 황금성으로 와주세요. 와주실거라 믿어 의심치 않아요.”
이 모든 것들을 남긴 후 그녀는 자신의 마차를 타고 ‘슈트롬베르크’에 있는 황금성으로 향했답니다.
남자가 깨어났을 때 자신이 잠들었다는 걸 알고 상심해 말했어요.
“그녀가 왔다 갔구나, 결국 그녀를 구해주지 못했어요.”
그런 다음 그는 그녀가 놓아두고 간 것들을 발견하고, 함께 있던 편지도 읽고 그 동안 있었을 일들을 알게 되었지요.
그는 일어나 길을 떠났어요. 슈트롬베르크(독일 서쪽 도시이름)에 있다는 그 황금성으로 갈 요량이었지요. 하지만 그게 정확히 어디 있는지는 알지 못했답니다.
그는 한참을 세상을 헤매고 다니다 껌껌한 숲에 들어가게 되었는데 장장 14일 동안을 걸었는데도 그 숲에서 빠져나갈 방법이 안 보이는 거예요.
그러다 한 번 더 저녁을 맞게 된 그가 지친 나머지 우거진 수풀 속에 들어누워 잠을 이루었답니다.
다음날 그가 다시 길을 떠났고, 그날 저녁 무렵에 다시 수풀 아래로 들어가 누우려는데 어디선가 울음소리와 비명 비슷한 소리가 들려 잠을 이룰 수가 없었어요.
사람들이 촛불을 밝힐 시간이 되자 그의 눈에 멀지 않은 곳에서 희미한 빛 하나가 보였지요. 그래서 그가 일어나 거리로 가 보았어요.  
그가 그 자그마할 것 같던 집에 도착해보니, 집 앞에 웬 거인 한 명이 죽치고 서 있었어요.
그가 속으로 생각했어요.
‘들어가려다 발각되면 내 목숨이 위험해져.’
그래도 결국 그는 위험을 감수하고 안으로 들어가는 시도를 했어요.
거인이 그를 발견하자 말했어요.
“마침 잘 됐네, 배고프던 참이었는데. 오늘 저녁식사를 네 놈을 먹어치워야겠다.”
“나를 놓아주는 게 좋을 걸,”라며 그 남자가 말했어요. “난 먹히고 싶지 않다고. 하지만 네가 정 뭘 먹겠다면, 내가 널 배부르게 해줄 순 있어.”
“참말이라면,”라며 거인이 말했어요. “놓아주지. 하지만 아무 것도 안 주면 당장에 먹어버릴 테다.”
그들이 집으로 들어가 식탁에 자리를 잡고 앉자, 남자가 먹어도 먹어도 줄지 않는 빵과 포도주와 고기를 꺼내었어요.
“우와 배부르다 이거.”라며 거인이 진심 한 가득 먹고 나더니 말했어요.
그런 다음 젊은이가 그에게, 슈트롬베르크(독일 서족 도시이름)의 황금성이 어디 있는지 말해줄 수 있느냐?고 물었어요.
거인이 말했지요.
“내 지도를 보여줄게, 거긴 온 도시들과 마을과 집이 소상히 적혀 있거든.”
그가 방에서 지도를 들고 나오더니 그 성을 찾아보았어요. 하지만 성을 발견하진 못했지요.
“걱정 마!”라며 거인이 말했어요. “2층 찬장에 더 큰 지도가 있으니까. 거기엔 나와 있을 거야.”
하지만 거기에도 역시 성은 없었어요.
젊은이가 떠나려하자, 거인이 부탁했어요.
“식량을 구하러 간 내 형이 집에 도착할 때까지 며칠만 더 기라려줘.”
거인의 형이 집에 도착했을 때, 그들은 슈트롬베르크(독일 서쪽 도시이름)의 황금성을 아느냐고 물었어요.
그가 대답했어요.
“일단 뭐 좀 먹고 내가 한 번 지도를 찾아볼게.”
그런 다음 그는 자기 침실로 가더니 지도를 뒤졌어요. 하지만 거기에도 성은 없었지요.
그랬더니 그가 훨씬 더 옛날 지도들을 꺼내와 쉬지 않고 뒤지다 결국 슈트롬베르크(독일 서쪽 도시이름)의 황금성을 찾고 말았답니다.
하지만 거긴 여기서 수천 킬로미터는 더 떨어진 곳이었지요.
“어떻게 거기까지 간담?”라며 젊은이가 말했어요.
그 거인이 말했지요.
“2백 시간이면 내가 너를 업고 그 근처에까지 데려다줄 수 있을 거야, 하지만 그 후부턴 나도 집으로 돌아와 애 젖을 먹여야하니까 너 혼자 가야해.”
그리하여 그 거인이 젊은이를 업고 그 성에서 500킬로미터 떨어진 곳까지 데려다 주었어요.
그러고 나서 거인이 말했어요.
“나머진 너 혼자 걸어서도 갈 수 있을 거야.” 
거인은 방향을 돌려 돌아갔어요. 
하지만 젊은이는 밤낮 계속 걸어 마침내 ‘슈트롬베르크’(독일 서족 도시 이름)의 황금성에 도착할 수 있었답니다.
때마침 마법에 걸린 그 처녀가 자신의 마차를 몰고 성을 돌아 안으로 들어가는 게 보였어요.
그는 그녀를 다시 보자 뛸 듯이 기뻐 그녀에게로 올라가고 싶어 산을 오르려고 시도하기 시작했지만 매번 유리 때문에 다시 미끄러져 내려오는 거예요.
그제야 자신이 그녀에게 다가갈 수 없음을 알게 된 그가 이만저만 상심이 되지 않아 속으로 말했어요.
“여기 아래에라도 머물며 그녀를 기다려야겠다.”
그리하여 젊은이는 임시로 머물 오막살이집을 한 채 직고는 1년 동안 거기서 기거했어요.
산 위에선 공주님이 마차를 몰고 매일 들락거렸지만, 젊은이가 그녀에게로 다가갈 순 없었지요.
그러던 어느 날 하루는 그가 오막살이집에서 밖으로 내다보는데, 도둑 세 명이서 서로 치고 박고 싸우고 있지 뭐예요. 
그가 그들에게 소리쳤어요.
“하느님이 그대들과 함께 하시기를!”
그 외침을 듣고 도둑들이 싸움을 멈추고 둘러보았지만 아무도 안 보이자 다시 서로를 때리며 싸우기 시작했어요. 싸움은 인정사정없었어요.
그래서 젊은이가 다시 소리를 쳤지요.
“하느님이 그대들과 함께 하시기를!”
도둑들이 다시 싸움을 멈추고 주변을 둘러보았지만 아무도 보이지 않자 서로 다시 때리기 시작했어요.
그래서 젊은이가 세 번째로 소리쳤지요.
“하느님이 그대들과 함께 하시기를!”
그러면서 그는 생각했지요.
‘아무래도 내 모습이 보여야 저들이 싸움을 멈출 거 같아.’
그래서 거리로 가 왜들 이리 포악스럽게도 싸우는지 물어보았어요.
도둑들 중 한 명이 말하길,
“내가 지팡이 하나를 발견했는데, 이 지팡이로 어떤 문이든 치면, 그 문이 벌컥 하고 열리고 만다오.”
두 번째 도둑도 말하기를,
“내가 망토 하나를 발견했는데, 이 망토를 걸치면, 남들 눈에 안 보인다오.”
그러자 세 번째 도둑도 지지 않고 말했어요.
“내가 말 하나를 발견했는데, 누구든 이 말에 올라타면 세상 어디든, 심지어 유리산 위에까지도 갈 수 있다오.”
이리하여 그들은 이 세 가지 물품들을 그들 공동소유로 할 것인지 아니면 따로 따로 나눠 가질 것인지를 결정못해 싸우고 있던 거라 말했어요.
그때 젊은이가 말했어요.
“그 세 가지 물품들 대신 내가 뭔가를 드리리다. 수중에 가진 돈을 없지만, 대신 다른 더 값나가는 게 있거든요. 자 그 전에 우선 당신들 것을 먼저 시험해 보고 당신들의 말이 참말인지 확인 좀 해봅시다.”
그래서 도둑들이 그 젊은이를 말에 태우고, 망토를 걸쳐주고, 지팡이도 손에 쥐어 주었어요.
이 세 가지를 걸치자마자 젊은이가 눈 앞에서 사라졌지요.
그러자마자 젊은이가 도둑들을 향해 강펀치들을 날리며 소리쳤어요.
“자, 이 날강도들아, 뭐가 어째 발견해, 훔친 주제야, 너희들의 몫이다, 이 주먹이나 받아라, 어때 만족하냐?”
그리곤 젊은이가 그 유리산으로 말을 타고 올라갔어요.
하지만 그가 산꼭대기에 있는 성문 앞까지 가보니 문을 닫혀 있었어요.
그래서 그가 지팡이로 성문을 때렸더니, 성문이 즉시 벌컥 하고 열어젖혀졌어요.
그는 안으로 들어가 계단들을 밟고 올라가고 또 올라갔어요. 마침내 홀(큰 공간)이 나오고 거기에 그 아가씨가 자기 앞에 포도주를 가득 채운 황금 컵을 놓고 앉아 있었어요.
하지만 그녀는 그를 볼 수가 없었어요. 왜냐면 그가 마법의 망토를 걸치고 있었기 때문이지요.
그녀 쪽으로 다가간 그가 자신의 손가락에서 그녀가 준 반지를 빼 그 컵 안에 던졌어요. 그 바람에 소리가 울렸어요.
그래서 그녀가 소리쳤지요.
“이건 내 반지인데, 그럼 나를 마법에서 풀어주러 그 이가 여기 오신 건가.”
그녀가 온 성을 다 뒤졌어요. 하지만 그를 발견할 수 없었지요. 
그때 그가 밖으로 나가더니 말 등에 올라탄 후 망토를 벗어던져버렸어요.
때마침 성문에 도착한 그녀가 그를 보곤 기쁨에 겨워 비명을 지르고 말았어요.
그는 말에서 내려 공주님을 두 팔 가득 안아주었고, 그녀는 그에게 사랑의 키스를 해주며 말했답니다.
“이제야 저를 마법에서 구해주셨군요, 내일 우리들의 결혼식이 있을 거예요.”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「까마귀」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「까마귀」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter93.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



94. 농부의 영리한 딸



옛날에 땅은 하나도 없고 가진 거라곤 그저 작은 집 한 채와 딸아이 하나뿐인 가난한 농부가 있었어요.
그때 딸이 말했어요.
“이럴 게 아니라 새로 개간되었다는 땅을 조금만이라도 달라고 왕께 말씀드려봐야겠어요.” 
그들의 가난함을 들은 왕이 땅 한 조각을 떼어 주셨고, 그것으로 그녀와 아빠는 밭을 갈고 작은 곡식 씨앗들을 뿌려 곡물을 거둘 작정이었어요.
그들이 밭 전체를 ‘갈았을’(파헤쳤을) 때, 땅속에서 ‘절구통’(큰 그릇 같은 거)이 하나 나왔어요.
“얘야,”라며 아빠가 딸아이에게 말했어요. “왕이 선한 의지로 주신 밭에서 난 절구통이니 당연히 그분께 드려야한다.”
하지만 딸은 그 말에 동의하지 않고 말했어요.
“아빠, ‘절굿공이’(막대기 같은 거) 없이 그냥 절구통만 드렸다간 우리보고 절굿공이까지 가져오라하실 거예요, 그러니 이 일은 말하지 않는 게 훨씬 나아요.”
하지만 아빠는 딸 말을 안 듣고 기어이 그 절구통을 들고 왕을 찾아가 받치며 새로 개간한 땅에서 난 거라 말씀드렸고, 왕께서 선물로 받아 주십사 말씀드렸어요.
왕은 그 절구통을 받더니 “더 없느냐?”고 물었어요.
“네.”라며 농부가 대답했지요.
그러자 왕이 “절굿공이도 가져와야하지 않겠느냐”라고 말했어요.
농부는 “더는 없습니다. 그게 다입니다요.”라고 말했지만 차라리 바람에다 대고 말하는 게 더 나았을지 몰라요.
감옥에 갇혔거든요.
그는 절굿공이를 어디 두었는지 이실직고 할 때까지 거기 감금되어 있어야했지요.
관리들이 매일 그에게 빵과 물을 가져다주었어요. 그게 감옥에 갇힌 사람들이 먹는 음식이었거든요. 
그런데 농부가 계속해서 탄식을 해대는 거예요.
“아! 딸애 말을 듣는 건데! 아아, 아아, 딸애 말을 들었어야하는 건데!”
그러면서 먹지도 마시지도 않으려 들었답니다.
그래서 왕이 관리들을 시켜 그 죄인을 데려오라 시키곤, 도대체 왜 매번 탄식하며 “아! 딸애 말을 들었어야하는 건데!”라고 말하는지, 딸애가 대체 무슨 말을 했는지 물었어요.
“딸애가 제게 말했습니다. 왕께 절구통만 가져가선 안 된다고요, 그럼 틀림없이 절굿공이의 행방을 물으실 거라고요.”
“네 딸이 그토록 영리하다면 어디 한 번 이리로 데려와보거라.”
그리하여 그녀가 왕 앞에 대령했어요.
그러자 왕은 그녀가 정말 영리한지 물으시겠다며 수수께끼를 하나 낼 테니 알아맞히면 그녀와 결혼하겠노라 말했어요.
그녀는 즉시 좋다고 말하고 수수께끼를 풀겠다고 했어요.
그런 다음 왕이 말했어요.
“내게 올 때 옷을 입지 말고, 그렇다고 벗지도 말고, 말을 타지도 말고, 걷지도 말고, 도로 안으로도 오지 말고, 도로 밖으로도 오지 말거라. 그럼 내 너와 결혼하겠노라.”
그래서 그녀는 집으로 가서, 옷을 모두 벗은 다음, 아무 것도 입지도 않고, 고기잡이 큰 그물을 하나 가져와 그 안에 앉아 그물로 몸을 칭칭 감고 또 감아 완전히 몸에 둘렀어요. 그래서 그녀는 벗은 것이 아니게 된 거죠. 그리곤 그녀는 당나귀 한 마리를 빌려 그 그물을 꼬리에 매달곤 자신을 끌고 가게 했어요, 그리하여 그녀는 말을 탄 것도 그렇다고 걷는 것도 아니게 되었죠.
당나귀는 바퀴자국들을 따라 그녀를 끌고 갔어요, 그래서 그녀의 엄지발가락만 땅에 닿았죠, 그러니 그녀는 도로 안으로 오는 것도 그렇다고 도로 밖으로 오는 것도 아니었지요.
그와 같은 모습으로 그녀가 도착하자, 왕은 “내가 낸 수수께끼를 모두 맞추었노라.”라고 말했어요.
그런 다음 왕은 그녀의 아빠를 감옥에서 풀어주고, 그녀를 아내로 맞이해, 모든 왕가의 재산들을 도맡아 관리하게 했지요.
이제 그로부터 몇 년이 지났을 때였어요.
왕이 한 번은 군대 사열식을 하는데, 몇몇 농부들이 궁전 앞에 자신들의 마차들을 끌고 와선 땔감들을 팔고 있었어요. 그들 중 일부는 소로 마차를 끌고 왔고, 또 일부는 말로 마차를 끌고 왔지요.
세 마리 말로 마차를 끌고 온 한 농부의 말 한 마리가 새끼 한 마리를 출산했는데, 그 새끼가 황급히 달아나더니 마차 앞에 있던 두 마리 소 사이에 드러누웠지 뭐예요.
농부들이 우르르 몰려오더니 곧 싸움이 벌어져 치고 박고 생난리도 아니었어요.
소 주인인 농부는 그 말 새끼가 자신의 소들 중 한 마리가 낳은 거니 자기가 데려가겠다고 우겼고, 상대방은 말이 낳은 새끼라며 그건 자기 거라고 우겼죠.
곧 이 싸움은 왕 앞에서까지 벌어졌어요. 
왕은 판결을 내렸어요.
“새끼가 애초 발견된 곳에 있게 해라, 그러니 소 주인이 주인이다.”
그래서 상대방은 그 자리를 떠나 울며불며 자신의 말 새끼를 두눈 뜨고 잃은 걸 한탄했지요.
때마침 그가, 왕비가 가난한 농가 출신이라 농부들에게 호의적이라는 말을 듣곤, 왕비에게 가 자신의 말 새끼를 다시 찾을 수 있게 도와 달라 하소연했어요.
그녀가 말했어요.
“네, 제가 당신에게 방법을 말씀드릴게요, 하지만 절대 제가 알려주었다 발설하지 않겠다 약속해주세요. 내일 아침 일찍, 왕께서 경비병들을 줄지어 행진시키실 때, 당신은 왕이 지나가는 도로 한 복판에 있다 큰 그물망으로 물고기를 잡는 척 하시며 그물에 물고기들이 잔뜩 든 마냥 그 그물을 비우세요.”
그러고 나서 그녀는 왕이 물으시면 어찌 답해야할지도 알려주었답니다.
그리하여 다음 날 농부가 거기 서선 마른 땅에서 물고기를 잡고 있었죠.
왕이 지나가다 말고 그것을 보곤 사신(심부름꾼)을 보내 이 바보 지금 여기서 뭐 하고 있는지를 물어보게했지요.
그가 대답했어요.
“저는 지금 물고기를 잡는 중이옵니다요.”
사신이 “여긴 물도 없는데 무슨 물고기를 잡는다는 거냐?”라고 물었죠.
농부가 말하기를,
“소가 말 새끼도 낳는 마당에 마른 땅에서 물고기를 못 잡겠습니까.”
그 사신이 돌아가 왕께 농부의 대답을 전하자, 왕이 당장 그를 자기 앞에 데려오라 말했어요.
“이건 네 놈의 생각이 아니렸다, 누가 알려준 게냐? 즉시 말하지 못할까.”
하지만 농부는 한사코 거부하며 이렇게만 말했어요.
“안 됩니다요, 이건 제가 생각해낸 거구먼요.”
하지만 왕의 부하들이 농부를 밀짚 더미 위에 밀어뜨리곤 비오는 날에 먼지 나도록 흠뻑 두들겨 패자 그도 마침내 그게 왕비의 아이디어였음을 이실직고 하지 않을 수 없었지요.
왕은 집에 도착하자마자 아내에게 말했어요.
“왜 나를 기만하는 거요? 당신은 이제 더는 내 아내가 아니오. 다 끝났소. 당신이 왔던 농부의 오두막으로 다시 돌아가시오.” 
하지만 그는 한 가지 호의를 주겠다 말했어요. 그녀가 가장 아끼고 사랑하는 물건을 한 가지 가져가도 좋다는 것이었죠.
그렇게 떠나게 된 그녀가 말했어요.
“네, 여보, 그리 말씀하신다면 따르도록 할게요.”
그녀는 남편을 포옹하고 키스하며 떠나겠노라 말했어요.
그런 다음은 그녀는 강한 술을 가져오게 해 작별주로 마시게 했어요. 왕은 많이 마셨고, 그녀는 조금만 마셨지요.
왕이 곧 깊은 잠에 곯아떨어졌어요.
그것을 본 그녀가 하인들을 불러 흰 천으로 왕을 잘 덮어주게 한 다음 문 앞에 대기하고 있던 마차에 옮겨 싣게 했어요. 그리곤 왕과 함께 그녀의 예전 작은 집으로 왔지요.
그녀는 그를 자신의 작은 침대에 눕혀드렸어요.
그는 하루 밤낮을 쉬지 않고 꼬박 잠들었어요.
그가 깨어나 주변을 둘러보며 말했어요.
“원 세상에! 여긴 어디지?”
그가 시종들을 불렀지만 아무도 오는 이가 없었죠.
마침내 그의 아내가 머리맡으로 오더니 말했어요.
“사랑하는 주군이시자 왕이시여, 제게 말씀하셨잖아요, 제가 세상에서 가장 아끼고 사랑하는 것을 하나 궁전에서 가져가도 좋다고요. 이 세상에 당신보다 더 사랑스럽고 소중한 것은 제게 없답니다. 그래서 당신을 데려온 거예요.”
왕의 눈에서 눈물이 솟아나오고 있었어요.
그가 말했지요.
“사랑하는 아내여, 당신은 내거고, 난 당신 거라오.”
그는 다시 아내를 데리고 궁전으로 가 그녀와의 결혼식을 한 번 더 열었어요.
그리고 현재까지도 그들은 아주 아주 행복하게 잘 사신답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「농부의 영리한 딸」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「농부의 영리한 딸」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter94.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



95. 늙은 힐데브란트
(힐데브란트는 주인공인 농부이름임)






옛날에 농부가 자신의 아내와 살고 있었어요.
그런데 그 마을의 목사님이 아 글쎄 농부의 아내에게 딴 마음을 품고 있었지 뭐예요. 그는 그녀와 행복하게 온종일 보낼 희망에 부풀어있었죠.
설상가상 농부의 아내도 그게 썩 싫진 않았어요.
그러다 하루는 목사님이 농부의 아내에게 말했지요.
“들어봐요, 자기, 내가 지금 막 우리가 둘만 오복하게 함께 있을 수 있는 방법 한 가지를 생각해냈는데 말이야. 지금 들려줄게. 수요일 침대에 들어 누워 당신 남편보고 아프다고 말하시오. 정말 아파 죽겠다고 생난리를 피우란 말이지. 내가 설교를 하는 일요일까지 그렇게 행동해요. 그럼 내가 설교할 때 이리 말할 테니까. ‘집에 아픈 아이든, 아픈 남편이든, 아픈 아내든, 아픈 아빠든, 아픈 엄마든, 아픈 오빠가 있는 사람은 누구든 간에, ‘이탈리아’(←영어. 독일어원문→벨리슐란트Walischland. 벨리슐란트가 무슨 단어인지 모르겠음. 사전에 없네요. 그래서 영어동화 번역자도 그냥 이탈리아로 해석한 모양임)에 있는 ‘뻐꾸기 동산’(원문→괴컬리 산. ‘괴컬리Gockerli’의 뜻을 전혀 모르겠음^0^사전에 없네요. 쏘오리~ Gockerliberg(독일어원문), the Gockerli hill(영어))으로 순례(종교적인 장소를 찾아다니며 참배하는 거) 여행을 떠나시오. 거기 가서 은화 1개로 월계수 잎사귀를 한 묶음 사시오, 그럼 아프던 아이며, 아프던 남편이며, 아프던 아내며, 아프던 아빠든 엄마든, 아프던 여동생이던지 간에 그 누구든 단번에 다 나아 다시 팔팔해질 테니.’”
“당장 그리해 봐야지,”라며 여자가 즉시 말했어요.
그리하여 수요일 당일이 되자, 농부의 아내가 자리에 누워 오만 데가 다 아프다고 불평하고 슬퍼했어요. 그래서 남편이 아내가 좋아할 만한 걸 다 해보았지만, 그녀는 좋아지지 않았죠, 조금도요.
그렇게 일요일이 되자, 여인네가 말했어요.
“지금 당장 죽을 거 같아요, 죽기 전에 목사님이 설교하시는 거나 한 번 들어보고 죽을 래요. 오늘이 설교하시는 날이잖아요.”
그 말에 농부가 말했어요.
“아, 여보, 그건 안 되지… 지금도 몸이 안 좋으면서 일어나면 더 않 좋다고. 들어봐, 내가 교회에 가서 목사님이 하시는 말씀을 주의 깊게 다 듣고 와 당신한테 말해줄게.”
“그럼,”라며 아내가 말했어요. “어서 가서 주의 깊게 듣고 와 들은 내용들을 죄다 제게 읊어줘요.”
그래서 농부가 교회에 갔답니다.
목사님은 다음과 같이 설교를 시작하셨어요.
“집에 아픈 아이든, 아픈 남편이든, 아픈 아내든, 아픈 아빠든 아픈 엄마든, 아픈 여동생이든 오빠가 있는 사람은 누구든 간에, 이탈리아에 있는 ‘뻐꾸기 동산’(원문→괴컬리 산)으로 순례 여행을 떠나시오. 거기 가서 은화 1개로 월계수 잎사귀를 한 묶음 사시오, 그럼 아프던 아이며, 아프던 남편이며, 아프던 아내며, 아프던 아빠든 아프던 엄마든, 아프던 여동생 오빠든지 간에 그 누구든 단번에 다 나아 다시 팔팔해질 테니. 그리고 누구든지 간에 이 순례 여행을 떠나기로 결심이 선 자는 예배가 끝난 다음 제게로 따로 오시오. 그럼 내가 월계수 잎을 담을 수 있는 자루와 은화(독일은화)를 주리다.”
그 말씀에 어느 누구도 농부만큼 기쁠 수 없었죠.
예배를 마친 후 농부가 목사님을 찾아갔더니, 목사님께서 월계수를 담을 자루와 은화를 주셨어요.
그걸 가지고 집에 오자마자 현관에서부터 농부가 소리쳤지요.
“만세! 여보 마누라, 당신은 이제 나은 거나 다름없어! 아 글쎄 목사님께서 오늘 설교를 하셨는데, ‘집에 아픈 아이든, 아픈 남편이든, 아픈 아내든, 아픈 아빠든, 아픈 엄마든, 아픈 여동생이든 오빠가 있는 사람은 누구든 간에, 이탈리아에 있는 ‘뻐꾸기 동산’(원문→괴컬리 산)으로 순례 여행을 떠나시오. 거기 가서 은화 1개로 월계수 잎사귀를 한 묶음 사시오, 그럼 아프던 아이며, 아프던 남편이며, 아프던 아내며, 아프던 아빠든, 아프던 엄마든, 아프던 여동생이든 오빠든지 간에 그 누구든 단번에 다 나아 다시 팔팔해질 테니.’라고 말씀하시지 않겠어. 게다가 내가 지금 그 목사님한테서 자루와 은화를 받아왔다고, 내 지금 당장 여행을 떠날 테야 그럼 당신이 더 빨리 나을 거 아냐.”
그 후 즉시 농부가 길을 떠났답니다.
하지만 남편이 가자마자 아내는 침대를 박차고 일어났고, 목사님도 곧이어 도착하셨지요.
하지만 이제 우리는 이들을 잠시 놓아두고, 농부를 따라가 보죠.
농부는 정말 열심히도 걸었답니다. 쉬지 않고 걸어갔지요.
‘뻐꾸기 동산’(원문→괴컬리 산)에만 도착하면 아내가 낫는다는데 걷기를 마다할 이유가 있나요.
그러다 그는 자신의 친구를 만났어요.
친구는 계란 장수였어요. 그는 막 시장에서 돌아오던 중이었지요. 자신의 계란을 시장에 내다 팔거든요.
“축복받으시게,”라며 친구가 말했어요. “그래 어딜 그리 바삐 가나?”
“(축복을) 길이 길이 받겠네, 친구,”라며 농부가 말했어요. “마누라가 아파서 말이야, 아 글쎄 오늘 목사님이 설교하시길, ‘집에 아픈 아이든, 아픈 남편이든, 아픈 아내든, 아픈 아빠든, 아픈 엄마든, 아픈 여동생이든 오빠가 있는 사람은 누구든 간에, 이탈리아에 있는 ‘뻐꾸기 동산’(원문→괴컬리 산)으로 순례 여행을 떠나시오. 거기 가서 은화 1개로 월계수 잎사귀를 한 묶음 사시오, 그럼 아프던 아이며, 아프던 남편이며, 아프던 아내며, 아프던 아빠든, 아프던 엄마든, 아프던 여동생이든 오빠든지 간에 그 누구든 단번에 다 나아 다시 팔팔해질 테니.’라고 말씀하시지 않겠나. 그래서 내가 지금 그 목사님한테서 월계수 잎들을 담을 자루와 은화를 받아가지고 순례 여행을 시작하려고 하고 있다네.”
“일 났군, 일 났어,”라며 계란 장수가 농부에게 말했어요. “들어보라고, 친구, 자넨 지금 엄청 바보 같은 생각을 하는 걸세, 그 말을 정말 믿는단 말인가? 그게 뭔 소린지 모르겠는가? 그건 목사님이 자네 마무라랑만 온종일 평화롭게 시간을 보내고 싶어 자네에게 여행을 떠나게 한 거라네.”
“아이고 세상에!”라며 농부가 말했어요. “그게 참말인지 알아봐야겠는걸!”
“어서, 가보 세나,”라며 친구가 말했어요. “자네가 어찌해야하는지 내가 알려줌세. 일단 내 이 계란 바구니에 들어가 있게나, 그럼 내가 자네 집까지 들어다주지, 그런 다음 자네 그 두 눈으로 똑똑히 보게나.”
그렇게 계획이 서자, 친구는 농부를 계란 바구니에 속에 넣고 농부의 집으로 향했답니다.
그들이 농부 집에 도착해보니, 아이고 맙소사! 일이 일사천리로 진행되고 있던 중이었어요! 
농부의 아내는 벌써 마당에서 키우던 건 거의 다 잡아 요리를 하고 있었고, 팬케이크(‘밀가루+달걀’을 구운 거)도 까짓것 만들고 있었지요. 목사님 또한 거기 있었는데, 그는 바이올린을 가지고 농부 집에 왔었어요.
농부의 친구가 문을 노크하자, 농부의 아내가 “거기 누구세요?”라고 물었어요.
“저에요, 농부 친구요,”라며 계란 장수가 말했어요. “하룻밤 묵고 갈까 해서요. 시장에서 계란들을 다 팔지 못해 집으로 돌아가던 중 짐도 너무 무겁고 벌써 날도 어둡고 해 더는 못 갈 거 같아서요.”
“정말, 친구 분이,”라며 농부 아내가 말했어요. “제가 아주 불편할 때 오셨네요, 그치만 어쩔 수 없죠, 들어오세요, 난로 옆 긴 의자(벤치)에 앉아 쉬고 계세요.”
그런 다음 아내는 친구와 농부가 든 그 바구니를 난로 옆 긴 의자 위에 두었어요.
하지만 목사님과 아내는 이미 한껏 기분이 들뜬 상태였지요.
마침내 목사님이 말했어요.
“들어봐요, 자기, 당신 노래 참 예쁘게 잘하잖소. 노래 한 번 해봐요, 내가 연주 해주리다.”
“오,”라며 농부의 아내가 말했어요. “지금은 노래 잘 못해요, 그래도 젊을 때는 한 노래한다는 소릴 듣고 살긴 했죠. 그치만 이젠 아니라고요.”
“어서요,”라며 목사님이 재차 권했어요. “한 소절만 짧게 부르면 되잖소.”
그 말에 농부의 아내가 노래를 시작했지요.
“내 남편을 이탈리아에 있는 ‘뻐꾸기 동산’(원문→괴컬리 산)으로 보냈지.”
 그 후 즉시 목사님이 맞장구를 치시며 이어 부르셨어요.
“월계수 담는 자루 도로 달라 않을 테니, 1년간 그가 돌아오지 않았음 좋겠네.” 
할렐루야(‘주를 찬양하라’라는 뜻임)~♥
그러자 백그라운드(배경)에 있던 ‘농부의 친구’ 역시 노래를 부르기 시작했지요. 미리 말씀드리자면 농부의 이름은 ‘힐데브란트’(남자이름)였답니다.
어쨌든 친구가 노래했지요.
“내 친애하는 힐데브란트(농부이름)여, 어짤(어쩔) 텐가, 난로 옆 벤치(긴 의자)에서 계속 그람시롱(그러면서) 있을 텐가?”
할렐루야~♥
그렇게 되자 농부 또한 바구니에서 노래를 불렀지요.
“오늘 이후 내가 노래란 걸 듣나봐라, 더는 이 바구니 속에 못 있겠네.”
할렐루야~♥
그런 다음 농부가 벌컥 바구니 속에서 나오더니, 목사님을 비오는 날 먼지 나도록 두들겨 패며 집밖으로 내쫓아버렸다네요.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「늙은 힐데브란트」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「늙은 힐데브란트」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter95.html

그리고 단어 두 개(이탈리아=‘벨리슐란트’, 뻐꾸기 동산=‘괴컬리 산’)는 아래의 독일어원문을 참조하였습니다. (솔직히 두 단어 뜻 잘 모르겠음 ㅜ_ㅜ)

독일어원문(1819년 판) ▶ https://de.wikisource.org/wiki/Der_alte_Hildebrand_(1819) 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



96. 세 마리 작은 새



대략 1천년 이상 전 이 나라(독일)엔 작은 왕국들만 있었답니다. 
그들 중 한(하나의) 왕이 ‘코이터베르그’(=‘어린이 동산’. 대충 그런 말이 아닐지?)에 살았는데 무척이나 사냥을 즐겼더래요.
한 번은 그가 말을 타고 성에서 나와 사냥꾼들과 사냥을 나갔는데, 산 위에서 젖소들을 돌보던 아가씨 세 명이 왕이 수행원들과 함께 지나가는 모습을 보곤, 가장 나이 많은 아가씨가 왕을 가리키며 나머지 두 아가씨들보고 소리쳐 말했어요.
“난 저이 아니면 아무하고도 결혼하지 않을 테야.” 
그러자 두 번째로 나이 많은 아가씨도, 왕 오른편에 있던 사람을 가리키며, 맞은편 언덕에서 맞장구를 치며 말했어요.
“난리 났네! 난리 났어! 나도 저이 아니면 아무하고도 결혼하지 않을 테야.” 
하지만 그 둘은 장관들이었지요.
왕이 이 모두를 들었어요. 그래서 그가 왕궁에 돌아오자마자 사람을 보내 세 아가씨들을 오시게 해, 대체 어제 산에서 무슨 말이 오고 갔던 건지 물었어요.
그 말에 아가씨들은 입도 벙긋하지 못했답니다.
그래서 왕이 가장 나이 많은 아가씨에게 “나를 남편감으로 받아주지 않겠소?”라고 물었지요.
그러자 그녀가 “네”라고 대답했어요.
나머지 두 장관들도 두 아가씨들과 결혼했답니다. 왜냐면 세 아가씨들이 모두 절세미녀들이었거든요, 특히 왕비가 된 큰 언니는 ‘아마’(노란빛을 띤 갈색. 아마의 섬유는 피륙을 짜는데 사용, 씨는 기름을 짜는데 사용)와 같은 머릿결을 지녔더래요.
하지만 나머지 두 여동생들은 아이를 낳지 못했어요.
왕이 한번은 집을 나가게 되어 두 여동생들을 초대해 왕비의 기운을 북돋아주게 했어요. 왜냐면 왕비가 아이를 막 출산할 예정이었거든요.
왕비는 밝고 붉은 별 하나를 지니고 세상에 나온 어린 아들을 낳았어요.
그러자 두 여동생들이 서로 말하길,
“우리가 저 아름다운 아기를 강물에 던지자.”
라고 했어요.
그녀들이 그를 강에 던지자, 아마도 ‘베이저 강’(독일 북부의 강)이었을 텐데, 어린 새 한 마리가 허공으로 날아오르며 이렇게 노래를 불렀어요.
“하느님의 말씀 전할 때까지, 그대들의 죽음에 속도 붙으리.
흰 백합꽃에 있는, 용감한 소년이, 그대들의 무덤이라.”
두 자매가 이 소리를 듣곤 화들짝 놀라 허겁지겁 도망을 쳤어요.
왕이 귀가하자, 그녀들은 “왕비가 강아지를 출산했어요.”라고 말했지요.
그러자 왕이 말하길,
“하느님이 하시는 일은, 언제나 선하다!”
라고 했어요.
하지만 강 근처에 살던 어부가 다행히도 그 어린 아이가 살아 있는 동안 다시 물에서 꺼냈지요. 그의 아내는 아이가 없었기에, 그들은 그 아이를 길렀답니다.
1년이 지나자, 왕이 다시 외출하게 되었고, 왕비는 아들을 한 명 더 나았어요.
그러자 부정한 여동생들이 이번에도 마찬가지로 아이를 강물에 던졌지요.
그때 어린 새 한 마리가 날아오르며 노래불렀어요.
“하느님의 말씀 전할 때까지, 그대들의 죽음에 속도 붙으리.
흰 백합꽃에 있는, 용감한 소년이, 그대들의 무덤이라.”
왕이 귀가하자, 그녀들은 “왕비가 강아지를 또 출산했어요.”라고 말했고, 왕은 다시 말하길,
“하느님이 하시는 일은, 언제나 선하다!”
라고 하였어요.
하지만 어부가 이번에도 강물에서 아이를 건져 길렀지요.
그 후 왕이 다시 여행을 떠나게 되었고, 이번엔 왕비가 귀여운 딸아이를 낳았어요.
그러자 못된 두 여동생이 이번에도 아이를 강물에 던졌어요.
그때 작은 새 한 마리가 높이 날아오르며 노래했어요.
“하느님의 말씀 전할 때까지, 그대들의 죽음에 속도 붙으리.
흰 백합꽃에 있는, 용감한 소년이, 그대들의 무덤이라.”
왕이 귀가하자, 그녀들은 왕에게 “왕비가 고양이를 출산했어요.”라고 말했어요.
그러자 왕이 벌컥 화를 내며 당장 아내를 감옥에 가두라 말했어요. 그 바람에 오아비는 오랫동안 갇혀 살아야했지요.
한편 아이들은 무럭무럭 자랐어요.
가장 큰 아이가 한 번은 다른 소년들과 낚시를 하러 나가려는데, 다른 소년들이 그를 동무로 받아주지 않고 말했어요.
“저리가, 이 주워온 아이야.”
그 후 즉시 소년은 큰 고민에 빠졌고, 나이 든 어부에게 “그게 참말인지?”를 물었지요.
어부가 “예전에 너를 강물에서 건진 적이 있단다.”라고 말해주었어요.
그래서 소년은 자신의 아빠를 찾아 나서려했지요.
하지만 어부는 소년에게 여기 머물러 있으라고 간청했지요, 하지만 무엇도 소년을 막을 순 없었지요. 마침내 어부도 동의하고 말았어요.
그리하여 소년이 길을 나서 수많은 나날을 걸어 다니다 결국 어느 강의 큰 물줄기에 다달았는데, 거기엔 노파 한 명이 낚시를 하고 있었어요.
“안녕하세요, 어머님.”라며 소년이 말했어요.
“오냐.”라며 그녀가 말했어요.
“물고기들을 많이 잡으셔야 하는데.”
“너도 아빠를 찾기 바란다. 그래 강물은 어찌 건널 거냐?”라며 그 여인이 물었어요.
“하느님은 아시겠죠.”
그러자 노파가 그를 등에 업고는 건너다 주었어요.
그러고도 소년은 한참을 찾아다녔지만 결국 자신의 아빠를 찾지 못했답니다.
1년이 지나자, 두 번째 소년이 자신의 형을 찾아 나섰어요.
그도 그 강에 도착했지요.
그리고 모든 게 그의 형과 같이 벌어졌어요.
하지만 결국에 두 오빠들이 다 집에 돌아오지 않자, 두 오빠들이 보고 싶던 딸이 어부에게 자신도 길을 떠나게 허락해 달라 청했지요. 왜냐면 오빠들을 꼭 찾아 나서고 싶었거든요.
그리하여 그녀도 마찬가지로 강의 큰 물줄기에 도착했지요.
그녀가 노파에게 말했어요.
“안녕하세요, 어머님.”
“오냐.”라며 그 노파가 대답했어요.
”하느님이 도우사 고기가 많이 잡히길 빌어요.“라며 처녀가 말했어요.
그 말은 들은 노파는 흥이 겨워져 그녀를 업고 강을 건너 주었고, 덤으로 마법의 지팡이도 주며 말했어요.
”가거라, 딸아, 이 길로 쭉 가거라, 가다 큰 검정 개 한 마리가 나와도 조용하고 대담하게 지나가야한다. 그 개를 쳐다보거나 웃어선 안 된다. 그런 다음 웅장한 성이 한 채 나올 게다, 그 성의 ‘문지방’(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/wrX05f )에 이 마법의 지팡이를 내려놓고 곧장 성으로 들어가 반대쪽 편으로 다시 나와야한다. 그럼 커다란 나무 한 그루가 자라고 있는 오래된 샘이 보일 게다. 그 나무에 걸린 새장에 새가 한 마리 있단다 그걸 끌어내리거라. 물잔 같은 것으로 그 샘물을 퍼서, 갔던 것과 똑같이 다시 나오거라. 문지방에서 마법의 지팡이를 집어 들고 가지고 오데, 그 개 옆을 지나갈 때 그 개의 얼굴을 아주 세차게 내리쳐야하느니라, 명심하거라 넌 그를 아주 세게 때려야한다, 그런 다음 내게로 오면 된단다.“ 
처녀는 곧 모든 게 할머니가 말씀하신 대로란 걸 알게 되었지요.
그녀는 샘에서 돌아 나오다, 서로를 찾아 지구 반 바퀴를 돈 두 오빠를 만나게 되었답니다.
그들이 함께 검정개가 길가에 누워 있는 곳까지 왔어요.
그녀가 그 개의 얼굴을 마법의 지팡이로 세차게 때렸더니 개가 잘생긴 왕자님으로 변신해 그들과 함께 강까지 오게 되었지요.
할머니는 거기서 계속 서 있었어요.
그녀도 그들을 다시 본 게 너무도 반가워 얼른 가 그들을 강 건너로 옮겨주고 그녀도 역시 떠났어요. 왜냐면 그녀도 마법에서 이제 막 풀렸거든요.
한편 나머지 사람들은 모두 나이 든 어부에게로 갔지요. 모두들 서로를 다시 본 게 너무도 반가웠어요. 
그리고 그들은 그 새(새장 속의 새)를 벽에다 걸어두었어요.
하지만 둘째 아들은 집에만 가만있지 않고 자신의 ‘격발식 활’(총처럼 생긴 거. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/DEg5gq )을 들고 사냥을 나갔답니다.
지쳤을 때쯤 그가 플루트(피리)를 꺼내 연주를 하였지요.
때마침 왕도 또한 사냥 도중이었는데 그 연주 소리를 듣고서 소리 나는 쪽으로 나아갔다, 젊은이를 만났지요.
왕이 젊은이에게 말했어요.
“누가 네게 여기서 사냥해도 된 다더냐?”
“오오, 아무도요.”
“그래, 넌 누구 아들이더냐?”
“저는 어부의 아들이옵니다.”
“하지만 그에겐 자식이 없지 않더냐.”
“못 믿으시겠다면, 저와 함께 가시지요.”
그래서 왕이 따라가 어부에게 물었지요.
어부가 모든 얘기를 왕께 해주었어요, 바로 그때 벽에 걸려 있던 새장 속의 작은 새가 노래하기 시작했어요.
“엄마는 작은 감옥에 홀로 앉아 계신다네, 오 왕족의 혈육인 왕이시여, 이 아이들 모두 당신의 자녀에요. 못된 두 자매가 이 아이들을 버린 것을, 물속에 깊이 내려앉기 전에 어부가 건져 키운 거라네.”
그러자 그들 모두가 깜짝 놀랐어요, 왕은 그 새와 어부와 세 아이들과 함께 성으로 돌아와, 감옥 문을 열고 아내를 데려오라 명령했어요.
하지만 그녀는 너무도 병약해져 있었지요.
그때 딸이 샘에서 떠왔던 물을 조금 마시게 해드렸지요.
그러자 왕비가 다시 건강해졌어요.
하지만 두 못된 자매들은 화형에 처해졌어요.
그리고 딸은 왕자님과 결혼식을 올렸답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「세 마리 작은 새」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「세 마리 작은 새」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter96.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



97. 생명의 물



옛날에 병이 든 왕이 있었는데, 아무도 그가 다시 나아질 거란 기대를 하지 않았죠.
그에겐 이 문제로 고민하는 세 아들이 있었어요. 그들은 궁전 정원으로 내려가 울었죠.
거기서 그들은 “왜들 그리 슬퍼하는가?”라고 묻는 노인을 한 명 만나게 돼요.
그들이 말했지요.
“아빠가 병이 드셨는데 아무래도 돌아가실 거 같습니다. 어떤 약도 듣지 않거든요.”
그러자 노인이 말하기를,
“지료약이 딱 하나 있긴 있지, 생명의 물이 그거라네. 그걸 드시면 다시 건강해지실 거네. 다만 찾기가 무척 힘들어서 그렇지.”
첫째가 말했어요.
“제가 어떻게 해서라도 찾아보겠습니다.”
첫째는 아픈 왕에게 가 자신이 생명의 물을 찾게 여행을 떠나는 걸 허락해 달라 청했어요. 왜냐면 그것만이 아빠를 살릴 수 있으니까요.
“안 된다,”라며 왕이 말했어요. “위험이 너무 커다. 차라리 내가 죽는 게 낫겠구나.”
하지만 첫째가 오랫동안 간청하자 왕도 동의해주었어요.
왕자는 마음으로 생각했어요.
“그 물만 가져오면, 아빠는 나를 제일 사랑하시게 될 게야, 그럼 왕국도 내게 물려주시겠지.”
그리하여 그가 출발했어요. 그가 말을 타고 좀 가자마자 어느 난쟁이 한 명이 길에 서선 왕자를 부르며 말하지 않겠어요.
“어디를 그리 바삐 가시나요?”
“바보 난쟁이 주제에,”라며 왕자가 아주 거만하게 말했어요. “네 딴 게 신경 쓸 게 아냐.”
그러면서 말을 타고 가 버렸죠.
그 바람에 작은 난쟁이가 아주 화가 나 사악한 소망을 빌어버렸어요.
그 후 곧 왕자가 산골짜기에 들어갔는데 말을 타고 들어가면 갈수록 점점 더 산들이 서로 좁아지더니 급기야 길이 너무 좁아 왕자가 한 발자국도 더는 나아갈 수 없지 뭐예요. 게다가 말을 돌리는 것도 불가능하고 그렇다고 말안장에서 내리는 것도 불가능했지요. 그렇게 그는 마치 감방에 갇힌 마냥 오도 가도 못하게 되고 말았어요.
아픈 왕이 오래도록 첫째를 기다렸지만 첫째는 감감 무소식이었어요.
그러자 둘째 아들이 말했어요.
“아빠, 그 물을 제가 한 번 나가 찾아보게 허락해주세요.”
그러면서 그는 속으로 생각했어요.
“형은 죽은 게 분명해, 그렇담 이 왕국은 내 꺼다.”
처음에는 왕도 그가 가는 걸 허락하지 않으려 했지만 결국 승복하고 허락해주었답니다.
그리하여 왕자가 길을 떠나 형이 갔던 똑같은 길을 밟게 되었지요.
그 또한 “어디를 그리 바삐 가시나요?”라고 묻는 그 난쟁이를 만났지요.
“바보 난쟁이 주제에,”라며 왕자가 말했어요. “네 딴 게 신경 쓸 게 아냐.”
왕자는 그리곤 눈길도 주지 않고 말을 타고 지나가 버렸지요.
그러니 화가 난 난쟁이가 그의 형처럼 그에게도 마법을 걸어버렸어요.
그도 산골짜기에 말을 타고 들어갔다가 나오지도 못하고 더 가지도 못하는 신세가 되고 말았죠.
아셨죠? 거만한 사람들의 운명은 모두 이렇답니다.
둘째 형마저 감감무소식이자, 막내가 이번에 자신이 그 물을 찾으러 갈 수 있게 보내달라 간청했지요.
마침내 왕도 그가 가는 걸 허락해주고 말았어요.
그가 난쟁이를 만났을 때도, 난쟁이는 “어디를 그리 바삐 가시나요?”라고 물었어요.
그러자 그가 멈추며 자초지종을 설명해주며 말했지요.
“나는 지금 생명의 물을 찾으러 가는 길이야. 그걸로 병드신 아빠를 낫게 하려고.” 
“그럼 어디를 가야 그걸 찾을 수 있는지는 아시고 가는 길이세요?”
“아니.”라며 왕자가 말했어요. 
“당신 참 예의 바르게 자라셨네요. 당신의 그릇된 형들처럼 거만하지도 않으시고. 그러니 제가 당신께 정보를 드릴게요. 당신이 어딜 가야 그 생명의 물을 얻을 수 있는지 말해줄게요. 그건 마법에 걸린 성의 안마당에 있는 분수에서 나와요. 하지만 그냥 그렇게 가셔서는 구할 수 없으세요. 자 받으세요, 여기 이 철제 요술봉과 빵 조각 두 개를요. 이 요술 봉으로 닫힌 철제 성문을 세 번 내리치세요, 그럼 활짝 열릴 거예요. 그리고 턱을 딱 벌리고 달려드는 사자 두 마리가 안에 있을 테니, 사자 한 마리 당 이 빵 조각을 던져주세요. 그럼 조용해질 거예요. 그런 다음 시계가 12시를 울리기 전에 서둘러 생명의 물을 담아오셔야 해요. 안 그럼 문이 닫히고 당신도 거기 갇혀버릴 거예요.”
왕자는 그에게 고맙다는 말을 하고 그 요술봉과 빵을 가지고 길을 떠났어요.
그가 도착해서보니, 모든 게 그 난쟁이가 말했던 대로였어요.
성문을 요술 봉으로 세 번 내려치자 활짝 열렸고요, 사자들에게 그 빵을 주어 잠잠하게 만들었지요. 
성에 들어가니, 커고 화려한 ‘홀’(큰 공간)이 하나 나오는데, 그 안에 마법에 걸린 몇몇 왕자들이 있고 그들의 손가락에서 반지들이 떨어져 바닥에 있었어요. 거기 같이 놓여 있던 검 하나와 빵 조각 하나를 왕자는 가지고 다시 걸었어요.
그 후 그가 어느 침실에 들어서니, 그 안에 그를 보자마자 기뻐하며 키스를 하는 아름다운 아가씨가 한 명 있었어요. 그녀가 그에게, “당신이 저를 구해주셨으니, 이 왕국 전부를 드리겠으니, 1년 후 다시 오시어 저와 결혼식을 성대하게 올려주세요.”
마찬가지로 그녀는 생명의 물이 어디서 나는지 그에게 알려주었어요.
그는 시계가 12시를 때리기 전에 서둘러 물을 뜰 참이었지요.  
그래서 계속 나아가는데, 아름다운 신형 침대가 있는 방이 나오지 뭐예요.
그가 너무도 지쳐있던 지라 잠시만 눈만 붙이고 싶단 생각이 들었어요.
그는 드러눕자마자 바로 깊이 잠들고 말았죠.
깨어나 보니, 시계가 벌써 11시 45분을 때리고 있었어요.
그가 화들짝 놀라 벌떡 일어나 분수대로 달려가 가까이에 놓여 있던 잔에 물을 담아 허겁지겁 달렸어요.
하지만 그가 철제 성문을 통과하려는 순간, 시계가 12시를 때렸고, 문이 폭압적으로 닫히는 바람에 그의 발뒤꿈치의 한 조각이 떨어져나가고 말았답니다.
그래도 그는 기뻤어요, 생명의 물을 얻었으니까요.
그래서 집으로 돌아가는데 길에서 그 난쟁이를 다시 만났답니다.
난쟁이가 검과 빵 덩어리를 보자 말했어요.
“그것들로 당신은 큰 부자가 되실 거예요. 이 검은 군대도 한꺼번에 물리칠 수 있는 검이고요, 이 빵 덩어리는 절대 줄어들지 않는 빵이세요.”
하지만 왕자는 형들과 같이 집으로 돌아가지 못하는 게 못내 아쉬워 말했어요.
“친애하는 난쟁이야, 내 두 형들이 어디 있는지 말해줄 수 없니? 내가 생명의 물을 구하러 오기 전에 형들이 먼저 출발을 했었는데 돌아오질 않았거든.”
“그들은 두 산 사이에 갇혀 있어요.”라며 그 난쟁이가 말했어요. “제가 그들에게 거기 갇히는 벌을 내렸거든요. 그들이 너무도 거만해서 그랬어요.”
그러자 왕자는 난쟁이가 마음을 누그러뜨릴 때까지 빌었어요.
하지만 난쟁이가 그에게 경고하며 말했지요.
“형들을 경계하세요, 그들은 나쁜 마음씨들을 가졌답니다.” 
형들이 오자 그는 기뻐 그동안 일이 어떻게 진행되었는지를 죄다 말해주었어요, 생명의 물을 찾아내 한 잔 떠온 일이며, 아름다운 공주를 구출했는데, 그녀가 자신을 위해 1년을 기다려줄 테니 그때 왕국도 얻고 결혼식도 성대하게 열기로 한 얘기들 모두를요.
이 후 그들이 함께 말을 타고 나아갔는데, 우연히 전쟁과 기근(식량부족)이 한 창인 나라를 지나가게 되었어요. 그곳 왕마저 멸망이 멀지 않았다 확신하고 있었죠. 그만큼 식량부족이 심각했거든요.
그래서 왕자는 왕에게 가 빵 덩어리를 건넸답니다. 그걸로 왕과 왕국이 배부르게 먹을 수 있었죠. 그런 다음 왕자는 왕에게 검도 건넸어요, 그 검으로 왕은 적들을 섬멸할 수 있었고, 왕국에도 다시 평화와 평온이 찾아왔답니다.
그런 다음 왕자는 자신의 빵 덩어리와 검을 돌려받았고, 세 형제는 다시 말을 타고 떠났죠.
이후에도 그들은 두 나라를 더 지나게 되었는데, 그곳에서도 전쟁과 굶주림이 만연해 있었어요. 그래서 왕자는 매번 자신의 빵 덩어리와 검을 왕들에게 건넸지요. 그런 식으로 하여 왕자는 세 왕국을 구했답니다. 
그 후 그들은 배를 하나 구해 타고 바다를 건너갔지요.
가는 도중, 두 형들이 별도로 얘기를 주고받았어요.
“생명의 물을 구한 건 막내지 우리가 아냐, 이대로라면 아빠가 녀석에게 왕국을 물려줄 거야. 그럼 우린 행복 끝 불행 시작이라고.”
그런 식으로 원한을 품기 시작한 그들이 서로 짜고 복수할 방법을 찾기 시작했어요.
그들은 막내가 깊게 잘 때까지 기다리더니, 잔에서 생명의 물을 다른 잔으로 붓고는, 대신 원래 잔에는 바닷물을 부어버렸어요.
그리하여 그들이 집에 돌아오고, 막내는 아픈 왕께 마시고 쾌차하시라며 자신의 잔을 내밀었지요.
하지만 왕은 소금기가 가득한 바닷물을 조금 마시자마자 전보다 건강이 훨씬 더 악화되고 말았어요.
이에 왕이 한탄하고 있는데, 두 형들이 나오더니 막내가 왕을 독극물로 죽이려 했다고 고소하곤, 자신들이야말로 진짜 생명의 물을 떠왔다며 왕께 내밀었지요.
왕이 그것을 맛보자마자 아프던 게 싹 사라지고 젊은 시절의 강인하고 건강함을 되찾았어요.
이후 그들 둘은 막내에게 가 조롱하며 말했어요.
“확실히 그 생명의 물을 구한 건 너야, 하지만 고생은 네가 했어도, 결실은 우리 거다. 넌 더 약아야 했어, 그리고 두 눈을 더 크게 뜨고 이 사안에 접근해야 했고. 우린 이걸 네가 바다에서 편히 자고 있을 때 다 꾸몄지. 1년 후 우리 중 한 명이 아름다운 공주에게 가 데려올 거다. 하지만 명심해, 네가 아빠에게 입을 벙긋하는 순간, 죽게 될 거란 걸, 그리고 네가 뭔 소리를 해도 아빠는 믿지 않을 거란 걸 말이야. 그러니 입 다물고 있어, 그럼 목숨만은 살려두지.” 
늙은 왕은, 막내아들이 자신의 생명을 없애려했다고 생각한 나머지 여간 화가 난 게 아니었어요.
그래서 신하들을 모두 모이게 해 아들에게 어떤 형벌을 내릴지 자문을 구했죠. 그리하여 막내왕자를 몰래 쏘기로 결론이 났답니다.
한번은 막내왕자가 말을 타고 별 의심 없이 사냥감을 추격하고 있을 때, 왕의 사냥꾼이 은밀히 그를 따라왔어요. 
그리하여 숲에 그들 둘만 남게 되었을 때, 사냥꾼이 몹시 슬픈 얼굴을 짓는 바람에, 왕자가 그에게 말했지요.
“이보게 사냥꾼, 뭐 때문에 그리 괴로운 얼굴을 하고 있나?”
사냥꾼이 말했어요.
“말씀드릴 수 없습니다, 그렇지만 말씀을 안 드릴 수 없어요.”
그러자 왕자가 말했어요.
“뭔지 털어나 보게, 내 자네를 용서해줄 테니.”
“아아!”라며 사냥꾼이 말했어요. “저보고 당신을 쏘아 죽이라고, 왕께서 명령하셨습니다.”
이에 충격을 받은 왕자가 말했어요.
“이보게 사냥꾼, 나를 살려주게. 자 내 왕자 옷을 자네에게 주겠네, 그러니 자네 사냥 복을 내게 주게나.”
사냥꾼이 말했어요.
“기꺼이 그리할 것입니다. 저는 정말로 당신을 쏘고 싶지 않아요.”
그런 다음 그들은 서로 옷을 바꿔 입고는, 사냥꾼은 집으로 돌아가고, 왕자는 숲 속 더 깊숙이 들어갔지요.
잠시 후 금화와 보석을 잔득 실은 마차 세 대가 왕에게 오더니 막내아드님을 찾았습니다. 그건 왕자의 검으로 적들을 물리치고 왕자의 빵으로 백성들을 먹일 수 있었던 세 왕국의 왕들이 감사의 마음을 표시하며 주는 선물이었어요.
늙은 왕이 그제야 생각했어요.
“내 아들이 그런 뜻이 아니었겠구나?”
그래서 신하들에게 말했지요.
“그가 아직 살아 있었어야 하는 건데, 내가 그를 죽였다 생각하니 마음이 아프구나!”
“그는 아직 살아있습니다.”라며 사냥꾼이 말했어요. “제 마음을 다해 왕의 명령을 실행할 수 없었나이다.”
사냥꾼은 자초지종을 다 왕께 말했어요.
그제야 왕이 자기 가슴에서 돌덩이가 떨어져나가는 듯 했지요. 왕은 “내 아들이 다시 돌아와 왕자의 지위를 누려도 좋으니라.”라고 온 나라에 선언했어요.
하지만 공주는 자신의 궁전으로 이어지는 길을 하나 만들어 밝은 금빛을 입혔어요.
그러면서 공주는 사람들에게 말하길, 
“누구든 이 길을 말을 타고 똑바로 오는 사람이 올바른 구혼자이니 그를 들여라. 하지만 누구든 이 길의 옆으로 말을 타고 오는 자는 올바름 구혼자가 아니니 들이지 말거리.”
시간이 이제 가까워지자, 첫째 왕자가 서둘러 공주에게 갈 생각을 했어요. 그녀를 구한 행세를 해 신부를 차지하고 왕국을 거머쥘 생각이었죠.
그리하여 그가 말을 타고 나아가, 궁전 앞에 도착해보니, 엄청 화사한 황금빛 길이 보여 ‘이 위를 밟고 지나가는 것은 죄이자 수치다.’라고 생각하고선 방향을 돌려 길의 오른쪽 편으로 말을 타고 갔어요.
그가 성문에 도착해보니, 보초병들이 “당신은 알맞은 사람이 아니오.”라고 말하는 바람에, 그를 다시 돌아가야 했답니다. 
그 후 곧 둘째 왕자가 길을 떠나 황금빛 길에 이르러 그의 말이 그 길에 한 발자국 내딛었을 때에도, 그는 ‘밟고 지나가다 흠집이라도 나며 죄이자 수치다.’라는 생각이 들어 방향을 돌려 길의 왼쪽 편으로 말을 타고 나아갔어요.
그가 성문에 도착했을 때, 경비병들이 “당신은 알맞은 사람이 아니오.”라고 말하는 바람에 그도 다시 돌아가야 했답니다.
마침내 딱 1년이 되자, 세 번째 왕자가 부푼 기대를 품고 연인을 만나러 숲에서 나왔지요. 물론 그동안의 슬픔도 다 지우고요.
그래서 길을 가면서도 그의 머릿속은 온통 공주 생각뿐이었고 그녀와 함께 있을 생각에 마음이 부풀기만 했지요. 그 바람에 그는 길이 황금빛인지도 알아차리지 못했답니다. 
그래서 그의 말은 황금빛 길의 한 가운데를 곧장 걸어 성문에 도착할 수 있었죠.
그가 성문에 도착하자, 성문이 활짝 열리며 공주님이 기쁜 마음으로 그를 맞이해주었어요.
“오 내 구원자여. 왕국의 지배자시어.”
그들은 큰 축하를 받으며 자신들의 결혼식을 성대하게 올렸답니다.
결혼식이 끝났을 때, 그녀는, 그의 아빠가 그를 집으로 초대한 일이며 그를 모두 용서했다는 애기를 전해주었어요.
그래서 그는 말을 타고 거기로 가 왕에게 모든 얘기를 해주었어요. 형들이 어떻게 자신을 배신했는지, 그리고 그가 왜 침묵을 지킬 수밖에 없었는지를요.
나이 드신 왕은 그들(형들)을 처벌하고 싶었지만, 그들은 바다로 출항해버리더니 살아있는 동안에는 두 번 다시 돌아오지 않았답니다.
  
(동화 끝)

동화 「생명의 물」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「생명의 물」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter97.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



98. 척척박사



옛날 옛적에 ‘오발탄’(원문→크랩Crabb. 바닷가에서 옆으로 기어 다니는 ‘게Crab’ 또는 ‘예상이 빗나간 상태Crab’를 의미함)이라는 가난한 농부가 하루는 소 두 마리가 끄는 마차에 땔감을 가득 싣고는 읍내로 가 은화 두 개를 받고 어느 박사에게 팔았어요.
박사는 돈을 하나씩 세리는 동안 때마침 식탁에 앉아 있었는데, 그게 농부의 눈엔 무척이나 고상하게 먹고 드시는 것처럼 비추어졌어요.
그래서 농부가 눈이 씌어 자신도 박사님처럼 되고 싶어졌지요.
잠시 서 있던 농부가 마침내 “저 같은 놈도 박사님이 될 수 있는 갑쇼?”라며 여쭈었어요. 
“오, 그럼.”라며 박사가 말했어요. “금방 되지.”
“어떻게요?”라며 농부가 물었어요.
“우선 책표지에 수탉 그림이 그려져 있는 ‘가나다 책’(원문→초보자용 알파벳 책)을 한 권 사게, 그 다음 자네 그 수레와 두 소를 돈으로 바꾸고, 옷도 좀 그럴싸한 걸로 입고 그 밖에 이것저것 돈칠 좀 하고, 세 번째로 ‘척척박사 아무개’라고 문패에 적어 대문 위에 걸어놓게나.”
농부가 들은 대로 모두 했어요.
그렇게 하여 그는 잠깐 사이에 사람들 사이에서 척척박사 노릇을 하게 되었어요.
머지않아 부자이고 지체 높은 귀족이 상당한 돈을 도둑맞았어요.
그러다 귀족은, 어느 어느 마을에 척척박사가 살고 있는데 돈이 어찌되었는지를 알 거란 얘기를 듣게 되었죠. 
그래서 귀족은 말이 끄는 마차를 몰고 그 마을로 가 오발탄 씨에게 “자네가 척척박사인가?”라고 물었어요.
“네, 그렇습니다.”라며 그가 말했어요.
귀족은 “그럼 나와 함께 가서 도둑맞은 내 돈 좀 찾아주게나.”라고 말했어요.
“오, 그러죠, 하지만 제 아내인 ‘그레테’(여자성씨)도 같이 가야합니다.”
귀족은 기꺼이 그들 둘을 마차에 태우고 함께 출발했답니다.
그들이 귀족의 성에 도착해보니, 식사준비가 거의 다 된 상태였어요.
“자리에 앉아 드시지요.”라는 말을 듣자 오발탄 씨는, “제 아내인, 그레테도 같이 먹어야합니다.”라고 말했어요. 그리하여 그는 그녀와 함께 식탁에 앉았답니다. 
그러자 첫 번째 하인이 맛있는 요리가 든 접시를 들고 입장했어요. 
그때 농부가 자기 아내를 팔꿈치로 슬쩍 찌르며 말했어요.
“그레테, 첫 번째야.”
이건 이 하인이 첫 번째 요리를 들고 왔다는 뜻이었지요. 
하지만 그 하인은 그 말이, “이 놈이 첫 번째 도둑놈이야.”라는 소리로 받아들였고, 화들짝 놀라 밖으로 나왔을 때 동료 하인들에게 이렇게 말했어요.
“박사가 다 알고 있네. 우리 모두 골로 가게 생겼어. 아 글쎄 나보고 첫 번째다 라고 말하지 뭔가.”
두 번째 하인은 들어가기 싫었지만 어쩔 수 없이 요리를 들고 입장해야했지요.
그러자 농부가 또 자기 아내를 팔꿈치로 슬쩍 찌르며 말했어요.
“그레테(아내 성씨), 두 번째야.”
이 하인은 정말이지 놀라 자빠질 뻔 했다 간신히 빠져나왔지요.
세 번째 하인의 운명도 별반 다르지 않았어요.
왜냐면 농부가 또 이렇게 말했거든요.
“그레테, 세 번째야.”
네 번째 하인이 뚜껑이 덮인 접시를 들고 입장했을 때, 귀족이 척척박사의 솜씨를 좀 보고 싶어서 이 뚜껑 아래에 무엇이 들어 있는지 추측해보시라 말했어요.
박사는 그 접시를 찬찬히 살펴보았지만 아무 생각도 나지 않아 그냥 탄신하며 말했지요.
“아, 불쌍한 ‘게’(자기 이름Crabb. ‘게Crab’=‘오발탄’=‘예상이 빗나간 상태’)야.”
귀족이 그 소리를 듣고는 외쳤어요.
“맞소! 당신이 맞추었소, 자 그럼 내 도둑맞은 돈을 누가 가지고 있는지도 맞춰보시구려!”
상황이 이리되자 하인들은 겁이나 안절부절 못해, 박사에게 신호를 보내 잠시 밖에서 좀 뵙자고 청하기에 이르렀지요.
그리하여 그가 밖으로 나오자, 네 명의 하인들이 다가와 그 돈을 자신들이 훔쳤다고 고백하기에 이르렀고, 돈도 기꺼이 되 갖다놓을 거니와 덤으로 그에게 많은 돈을 줄 테니 제발 이 사실을 발설하지만 말아달라고 빌었답니다.
왜냐면 도둑질이 발각되면 그들이 교수형(목이 매달림)에 처해질 게 분명하니까요.
그들은 그를 데리고 돈을 숨겨둔 곳으로 안내해주었어요. 
이것에 박사는 만족해하며 홀로 다시 돌아와 식탁에 앉으며 말했지요.
“각하, 제가 이제부터 금이 어디 숨겨져 있는지 찾아보기 위해 제 책을 좀 살펴볼까 합니다.”
하지만 다섯 번째 하인은 박사가 더 알고 있는지 아닌지를 엿듣기 위해 난로 속에 기어들어가 있었어요.
박사는 여전히 앉아서 자신의 ‘가나다 책’(원문→초보자용 알파벳 책)을 펼치곤 앞뒤로 페이지들을 넘겨 수탉그림을 찾고 있었어요.
그런데 수탉 그림이 있는 페이지가 금방 나오지 않는 거예요, 그래서 그가 말했지요.
“여기 있는 거 다 아니까 어서 나오는 게 좋을 거다.” 
그리되니 난로 속에 숨어 있던 친구가 그게 자신을 의미하는 줄 알고 깜짝 놀라 튀어나오며 소리쳤지요.
“저 사람 정말 다 알고 있네!”
그런 다음 만물박사는 돈이 어디 있는지 가르쳐주었어요. 하지만 그는 누가 훔쳐갔었던 건지는 말하지 않았죠. 그 일로 그는 양쪽에서 막대한 사례금을 대가로 받을 수 있었고 유명 인사가 되었답니다.(ㅋㅋㅋ)
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「척척박사」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「척척박사」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter98.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



99. 유리병 속의 도깨비



새벽 일찍부터 밤이 늦도록 힘들게 일하며 살아가는 한 가난한 나무꾼이 있었답니다.
그가 마침내 돈을 좀 모이자 아들에게 말했어요.
“얘야, 넌 내 유일한 아들이다. 내가 그동안 이마에 땀나도록 모은 돈을 네게 줄 테니 이 돈으로 학업에 한 번 힘써보거라. 네가 뭐라도 정직한 기술이라도 배운다면, 나중에 내 팔다리가 뻣뻣해져 집에 머물려야할 만큼 나이 들게 되면 네가 날 돌봐줄 수 있을 거잖니,”
그래서 청년은 고등학교로 가 선생님들 밑에서 부지런히 배우고 칭찬을 들으며 오랫동안 머물렀답니다.
2학년까지 마쳤을 때, 아직 학업이 완성되지 못한 시점에, 그만 아빠가 벌어두신 약간의 돈이 다 떨어지고 말아, 청년은 집으로 돌아올 수밖에 없었죠.
“아아,”라며 아빠가 애석해하시며 말했어요. “더는 너를 뒷바라지 못하겠구나. 게다가 요즘 같이 불경기엔 하루 종일 일해도 입에 풀칠하기도 빠듯하니 말이다.”
“사랑하는 아빠,”라며 아들이 대답했어요. “걱정 마세요, 이것도 하느님의 뜻이신데, 좋게 해결될 거예요, 저도 곧 일에 익숙해질 테고요.”
하루는 아빠가 숲으로 나가 땔나무를 해와 돈을 벌려 하셨지요. 그래서 아들이 말했어요.
“저도 함께 가서 도와드릴게요.”
“아서라, 내 아들아,”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “넌 힘들어서 못해. 이런 거친 일에 익숙지도 않으면서 견디지 못할 게다, 게다가 도끼도 한 자루 뿐이고 한 자루를 더 살 돈도 없단다.”
“이웃집에 가셔서,”라며 아들이 대답했어요. “내 걸 하나 빌려오시면 되잖아요.”
아빠가 이웃집에서 도끼를 한 자루 빌려왔어요.
다음날 새벽 동이 트자마자 그들은 함께 숲으로 갔답니다.
아들은 아빠를 도와드리는 게 즐거워 팔팔하게 움직였죠.
하지만 태양이 그들의 머리 위로 곧장 내릴 쬘 때(낮 12시)에, 아빠가 말했어요.
“점심을 먹으며, 좀 쉬자구나, 그래야 다시 일을 시작할 수 있지.”
아들은 자신의 빵을 두 손에 쥐곤 말했어요.
“쉬고 계세요, 아빠, 전 안 피곤하니, 이 숲을 좀 걸어볼게요, 새 둥지들이 있을지도 모르고요.”
“아 이 멍청아,”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “어딜 또 돌아다니려는 게냐? 그러다 지쳐서 더는 도끼질을 못 하게 되면 어쩌려고. 여기 내 옆에나 앉아 있거라.”
하지만 아들은 숲으로 들어갔답니다. 자신의 빵을 먹으면서요. 아주 흥겨웠지요, 이리저리 푸른(초록색) 나뭇가지들 사이로 혹시라도 새 둥지가 보이지 않나 하고 기웃거리면서요.
새 둥지를 찾던 그가 더 들어가 보니 마침내 엄청 크고 무시무시해 보이는 떡갈나무 한 그루가 나오지 뭐예요. 정말 수백 년은 묵은 나무 같았지요, 어른 다섯 명이서 안아도 다 못 안을 두께였거든요.
그는 잠시 서서 쳐다보다 생각했지요.
‘이런 나무엔 새 둥지가 참 많지.’
그때 뭔가가 들리는 듯 했어요.
그가 들어보니 그건 누군가가 아주 숨차하며 외치는 고함소리였어요.
“날 꺼내줘, 날 꺼내줘!”
그가 주위를 둘러보았지만 아무 것도 없었어요. 아무래도 목소리는 땅에서 나오는 것 같았어요.
그래서 그가 소리쳤지요.
“어디 계신데요?”
목소리가 대답했어요.
“난 여기 이 떡갈나무 뿌리 사이에 있어. 날 꺼내줘! 날 꺼내달라고!”
학자(배운 사람)가 나무 밑 흙들을 파보기 시작했지요.
나무뿌리 사이를 살펴보니, 마침내 빈 작은 공간에 유리병 하나가 나왔어요.
그가 집어 들고 햇빛에 비춰보니 그 안엔 개구리처럼 생긴 생물체가 폴짝폴짝 뛰고 있었어요.
“날 꺼내줘! 날 꺼내달라고!”라며 그것이 다시 소리쳤어요.
학자는 별 생각 없이 그 병의 마개를 톡 하고 따주었지요.
그 즉시 도깨비 한 마리가 공중으로 스멀스멀 솟아나오더니 점점 커지기 시작해 몇 초만 떡갈나무 크기의 절반만큼이나 커져 학자 앞에 떡하니 서 있지 뭐예요.
“알겠지,”라며 도깨비가 끔찍한 목소리로 소리쳤어요. “내가 이 은혜를 어떻게 갚을지?”
“아니,”라며 학자가 겁도 없이 말했지요. “그걸 내가 어떻게 알아?”
“곧 알게 해주지,”라며 도깨비가 큰 소리로 말했어요. “내가 널 목 졸라 ○일 거거든.”
“세상에 이런 법이 어딨어,”라며 학자가 말했어요. “내가 아니었음 넌 계속 갇혀 있었을 테고, 난 생명의 위협을 받는 일도 없을 거라고. 지나가는 사람에게 물어와 이게 말이 되냐고.”
“그건 그거고, 이건 이거지,”라며 도깨비가 말했어요. “어쨌든 넌 죄 값을 받아야해. 내가 호의를 바라며 얼마나 오랫동안 갇혀 있었는지 알아. 아니, 이젠 응징을 기다려왔다고. 난 위대한 ‘메르쿠리우스’(←로마신화. 여러 신들의 심부름을 하는 신. 그리스신화의 ‘헤르메스’에 해당함)다. 누가 나를 구하든 그 놈의 목을 비틀어버리고 말테다.”
“아니지, 이건 아니라고,”라며 학자가 대답했어요. “천천히 좀 하자고. 난 우선 네가 저 작은 유리병에 정말로 갇혀 있었는지부터 알아야겠어. 네가 정말 그 혼령인지도 말이야. 정말 네가 다시 저기로 들어간다면, 그럼 난 믿고 네게 내 목숨을 맡길 게.”
도깨비가 거만하게 말했어요.
“가소롭긴.”
도깨비가 스스로 몸집을 줄이더니 처음 봤을 때만큼이나 작아지고 홀쭉해져 그 유리병 속으로 다시 쏙 기어들어갔어요.
그러자마자 학자가 병의 마개를 막아 떡갈나무 뿌리들 사이로 도로 던져버렸지요.
도깨비가 당한 거예요.
학자가 돌아서 아빠가 계신 쪽으로 가려는데, 도깨비가 아주 측은한 목소리로 울부짖었어요.
“아, 나 좀 꺼내줘! 날 꺼내달라고!”
“안 돼,”라며 학자가 대답했어요. “두 번씩이나 당하게! 널 꺼내주었다가 내 목숨 잃을 일 있니. 구해주었다는 이유로 날 해치려던 자를 내가 뭘 믿고 풀어줘.”
“네가 날 풀어주면,”라며 도깨비가 말했어요. “네가 평생 다 쓰고도 남을 돈을 줄게.”
“안 돼,”라며 청년이 대답했어요. “그러려면 처음에 했어야지. 나를 속여 놓고선.”
“행운을 걷어차지 마,”라며 도깨비가 말했어요. “이번엔 정말이라고, 난 너를 해치지도 않을 거고, 펑펑 보답을 할 거란 말이야.”
학자가 생각했어요.
‘그래볼까, 약속을 지킬 것 같은데, 어쨌든 해치기밖에 더 하겠어.’
그래서 그가 마개를 열어주었고, 도깨비가 유리병에서 나와 예전 자신의 모습으로 변했어요. 그가 거인만큼 큰 모습으로 변해 기지개를 쭉 폈지요.
“이제 보답을 해주마.”라며 도깨비가 말하더니, 학자의 손에 작은 자루를 하나 건네주었어요. 그건 꼭 반창고처럼 생겼답니다.
도깨비가 말했어요.
“그것의 한쪽 끝을 상처 난데 바르면 상처가 나아져, 만약 그 반대쪽 끝으로 강철이나 쇠를 문지르면 그건 은으로 변한단다.”
“한 번 시험해봐야겠는데,”라며 학자가 말하더니, 어느 나무쪽으로 가 도끼로 찢은 다음 반창고 한쪽 끝으로 문질렀어요.
그 즉시 상처가 아무며 치유가 되었답니다.
“오, 아주 좋은데,”라며 학자가 도깨비에게 말했어요. “그럼 잘 가.”
도깨비는 자신을 구해준 것에 대해 그에게 감사했고, 청년은 선물을 준 것에 대해 도깨비에게 감사해하며 아빠한테로 돌아왔답니다.
“어딜 그리 싸돌아다니는 게냐?”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “나무 베는 걸 잊은 게냐? 꾸준히 뭘 하질 못하는 구나.”
“쉬세요, 아빠, 제가 마저 할게요.”
“네가 어떻게,”라며 아빠가 얹잖아 하셨어요. “할 줄도 모르잖니.”
“보세요, 아빠, 제가 곧 이 나무를 베어 넘겨볼게요, 그럼 금방 쪼개질 거예요.”
그런 다음 그는 자신의 반창고는 꺼내 도끼를 쓱쓱 문지른 다음 크게 한 방 휘둘렀지요.
하지만 도끼날이 은으로 변해버리는 바람에 날이 뭉개지고 말았어요.
“어어, 아빠, 주신 도끼가 이산한데요, 크게 구부러져 버렸어요.”
아빠가 놀라 말했어요.
“아아, 어쩌자고 그랬니? 이제 물어줘야 할 건데, 우린 돈도 없잖니, 네게 일 한번 시켰다가 이게 뭔 꼴이냐.”
“화내지 마세요,”라며 아들이 말했어요. “도끼 값은 제가 구해볼게요.”
“오 이 멍텅구리야,”라며 아빠가 분통을 터뜨렸어요. “네가 어떻게? 네 게 다 내가 준 건데. 기술을 배우라 학교에 보냈더니 나무 하나 베는 것도 모르잖니.”
잠시 후 학자가 말했어요.
“아빠, 일은 이제 됐으니, 좀 쉬죠.”
“어라, 뭐라고!”라며 아빠가 대답했어요. “내가 지금 너처럼 잠자코 있을 때냐? 난 계속 일할 테니, 집에 가르거든 너나 가려구나.”
“아빠, 저는 이 숲에 처음 온 거라, 혼자서는 집엘 못 간단 말예요. 같이 가줘요.”
아빠는 화가 많이 났지만, 아들이 하나뿐이라 화를 누그러뜨리고 집으로 함께 가주었어요.
그런 다음 아빠가 아들에게 말했지요.
“어쨌든 가서 그 망가진 도끼를 팔고오너라, 일단 그거라도 판 돈과 내가 번 돈으로 이웃집에 값아 줘야겠다.”
아들은 그 도끼를 들고 도시에 있는 금은방에 갔어요.
금은방 주인이 이리저리 재보더니 저울에 달아본 후 말했어요.
“이건 은화 4백 개 값이요, 한데 난 그만한 돈이 없구려.”
아들이 말했어요.
“그럼 가지고 계신 돈만큼이라도 먼저 주세요, 나머지는 제가 아저씨께 빌려드린 거로 하면 되잖아요.”
금은방 주인이 그에게 은화 3백 개를 주고, 나머지 은화 1백 개는 빚진 걸로 장부에 적어놨어요.
그런 까닭에 아들이 집에 도착해 말씀드렸어요.
“아빠, 돈 가져왔어요, 이웃집에 가셔서 그가 얼마를 달라는지 물어보시고 오세요.”
“벌써 물어봤구나,”라며 노인이 말했어요. “은화 1개와 ‘작은 은화’(원문→그로셴) 6개란다.”
“그럼 그에게 은화 2개와 ‘작은 은화’ 12개를 주고 오세요, 가격을 두 배로 쳐주면 좋아할 거예요. 돈인 이제 충분하거든요.”
그리고 그가 아빠에게 은화 1백 개를 드리며 말했어요.
“이제 맘 편하게 원껏 사세요.”
“원 세상에!”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “이 많은 돈이 다 어디서 난 게냐?”
학자가 그제야 지금까지 있었던 일들을 아빠께 말씀드렸어요. 자신의 운을 믿고 행동했더니 좋은 결과를 어데 되었다는 얘기들이었지요.
하지만 남은 돈이 있잖아요, 이제 그는 그 돈으로 다시 고등학교에 돌아가 계속 배움을 이어갔답니다. 또한 자신의 반창고 덕분에 아픈 사람들을 계속 치유할 수 있었고요, 그리하여 그는 온 세상에서 가장 유명한 의사가 될 수 있었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「유리병 속의 도깨비」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「유리병 속의 도깨비」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter99.html 
 
읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



100. 악마의 숯검댕이 동생



제대한 병사가 먹고 살 길이 막막해 이제 정말 어찌해야할지 몰랐어요.
그래서 숲으로 들어가 잠시 걸었죠.
그때 난쟁이 한 명을 만났는데, 그는 악마였어요.
난쟁이가 그에게 말했어요.
“뭔 일이래, 얼굴이 왜 죽을상이야?”
그러자 병사가 말했어요.
“배는 고픈데 돈이 없어서요.”
악마가 말했어요.
“그럼 내 밑에 들어와서 일해 볼래, 한 평생 먹고 살 만큼은 주께? 7년만 일해주면 돼, 그 후부터 넌 자유야. 다만 한 가지 약속은 지켜줘야 해. 그게 뭐냐면, 넌 씻어서도 빗질을 해서도 옷매무새를 단정히 해서도 안 되고, 머리카락과 손톱을 깎아서도 안 되고, 두 눈에서 눈물을 닦아서도 안 돼.”
병사가 말했어요.
“좋아요, 그럼 어쩔 수 없죠, 할게요.”
그는 난쟁이를 따라 곧장 지옥으로 들어갔어요.
거기서 그는 악마가 시키는 것들을 했어요. 먼저 끓는 솥에 불을 지피고, 집을 청소하고, 쓸어 담은 걸 죄다 문 뒤에 버리고, 다른 것들도 정리정돈했지요.
다만 그는 솥 안을 들여다봐선 안 된다는 주의를 들었는데, 그럼 그(병사)에게  좋지 않을 거란 거였지요.
병사가 말했어요.
“좋아요, 주의할게요.”
그런 다음 늙은 악마는 다시 방랑길에 올랐고, 병사는 자신의 새로운 일을 하며 불을 지피고 먼지를 쓸어 담아 문 뒤에 버렸지요. 그게 지시받은 사항이었으니까요.
늙은 악마가 돌아와 시킨 일이 잘 되었는지를 살펴보곤 만족했어요. 그래서 두 번째 방랑을 떠났죠.
일에 익숙해지자 병사도 차차 주변 환경이 눈에 들어왔어요. 도처에 놓인 솥에선 불이 떼어지고 있었고, 솥 안에선 뭔가가 팔팔 끓으며 연식 김을 내뿜고 있었죠.
그리되니 악마가 특별히 단속을 시켰음에도 병사는 그 솥 안으로 들여다보고 싶어졌어요.
그러다 결국 감정을 억누르지 못하고 살짝만 뚜껑을 열어 안을 힐끗 들여다보았죠. 그 안엔 자신의 고참병이었던 ‘병장’(가장 높은 병사 계급)이 들어있지 뭐예요.
“옳아, 이 자식!”라며 병사가 말했어요. “여기서 만나네? 옛날에 나를 참 갈구 었지, 어디 지금도 그러나 한 번 보자.”
그가 재빨리 뚜껑을 닫곤 불에 통나무들을 더 넣어 불을 더 지폈어요.
그후 그가 두 번째 솥으로 가 뚜껑을 살짝 들어 안을 들여다보니, 이번엔 자신의 옛 ‘소대장’(소위. 가장 낮은 장교계급)이 앉아 있지 뭐예요.
“아, 이 자식을, 여기서 만나네! 옛날에 나를 참 갈구 었었지, 어디 지금도 그러나 한 번 보자.”
그가 재빨리 뚜껑을 닫더니 새로운 통나무들을 가져와 불을 활활 지폈어요.
그런 다음 그는 세 번째 솥에는 누가 앉아 있나 보려고 들여다보았더니 진짜 자기 부대의 장군님이 앉아 계시지 뭐예요.
“아아, 이 분을, 내가 여기도 만나네? 옛날엔 권위를 내세워 우리들을 참 괴롭혔지, 어디 지금도 잘 나가나 한번 보자.”
그가 땔나무들을 가져와 사정없이 불을 지펴 활활 타게 만들었지요.
그런 식으로 그는 어느덧 7년을 지옥에서 보내게 되었답니다. 씻지도 않고, 빗질도 않고, 옷매무새 단장도 않고, 머리카락이며 손톱도 깎지 않고, 두 눈에서 눈물도 닦지 않고 지낸 7년이었지만 6개월만 있었다는 느낌이 들 정도로 시간이 후딱 지나가버렸답니다.
이제 7년이 다 지나자, 악마가 오더니 말했어요.
“잘 했다 ‘한스’(주인공이름. 한스는 독일사람이란 뜻임), 그래 지금껏 무슨 일을 해왔더냐?”
“솥 아래 불을 지피고, 먼지를 쓸어 담아 문 뒤에 버렸습니다.”
“게다가 솥 안을 엿보기도 했고 말이야. 불을 더 지폈기에 넌 무사할 수 있었다. 안 그랬음 네 목숨이 몰수당할 뻔했어. 자 이제 시간을 다 채웠으니 집으로 다시 돌아가겠지?”
“네,”라며 병사가 말했어요. “아버지께서 집에서 무고하신지 얼른 보고 싶거든요.”
악마가 말했어요. 
“네가 번 보수는 담아 가려면 그동안 네가 갖다버린 먼지들을 네 배낭(가방)에 가득 담아서 집으로 돌아가거라. 단 너는 가는 길에 씻어서도 그렇다고 빗질을 해서도 안 된다, 이건 네 머리카락과 수염도 마찬가지며, 손톱을 깎아서도 눈을 닦아서도 안 된다. 그리고 누가 네게 어디서 오는 길이냐고 물으면 넌 ‘지옥에서’라고만 답해야하며 누가 네게 당신이 누구요라고 물으면 넌 ‘내 왕이신 악마의 숯검댕이 동생이오.’라고 답해야 하느리라.“
병사는 입을 꾹 닫고 악마가 시킨 대로 했지만 보수가 여간 불만족스러운 게 아니었어요.
그는 다시 숲으로 올라가자마자 먼지뿐인 배낭을 비우려고 열어봤더니 먼지가 그새 온통 순금으로 변해있지 뭐예요.
“상상도 못한 일인데.”라며 그가 말하며 크게 만족해하며 마을로 들어섰지요.
여관 주인이 여관 앞에 서 있다 병사가 다가오는 것을 보고 기겁을 했어요. 왜냐면 한스(주인공이름. 독일 사람이란 뜻임)가 까마귀보다도 더 지독히도 새까맣기 때문이었죠.
주인이 그를 불러 물었어요.
“어디서 오는 길이시오?”
“지옥에서.”
“당신은 누구시오?”
“내 왕이신 악마의 숯검댕이 동생이오.”
상황이 그쯤 되고 보니 주인은 절대 그에겐 방을 내주지 않으러 했어요.
하지만 한스(주인공이름)가 떡하니 금을 보여주자 주인은 서둘러 나와 직접 문의 ‘빗장’(문 안쪽에 거는 막대기)을 열어주었지요.
그런 다음 한스는 최상급 방과 시중 그리고 먹을 것과 마실 것으로 배를 가득 채웠어요. 그래도 악마가 누누이 강조한 대로 빗질이나 세수는 절대 하지 않고 그대로 침대에 누웠답니다.
하지만 여관 주인은 배낭에 가득 든 금이 눈에 아른거려 잠시도 눈을 붙일 수 없어 밤사이 몰래 기어들어와 배낭을 훔쳐가 버렸답니다.
하지만 다음 날 아침 한스 일어나 여관 주인에게 돈을 치르고 계속 길을 가려고 보니 자기 배낭이 사라지고 없지 뭐예요!
하지만 그는 곧 평정심을 찾고 생각했어요.
“내가 잘못해서 생긴 불행이 아니야.”
그리곤 그는 곧장 지옥으로 다시 되돌아가 자신이 겪은 사고를 늙은 악마에게 불평하고 도움을 청했어요.
악마가 말했답니다.
“앉아보거라, 내가 씻거주고 머리를 빗겨주고 옷매무새를 가다듬어주고, 머리카락과 손톱을 잘라주고, 두 눈에서 눈물을 닦아주마.”
악마는 그 일을 다 마친 다음 그에게 먼지가 가득 든 배낭을 다시 한 번 주면서 말했어요.
“가서 그 여관주인에게 말하거라. ‘내 돈을 돌려줘야한다, 그러지 않음 악마가 찾아와 당신을 데려가, 내(한스) 대신 지옥의 불을 지피는 일을 시키게 될 것이다’고 말해주거라.” 
한스가 올라와 여관주인에게 말해주었어요.
“당신이 내 돈을 훔쳐갔지요. 만약 돌려주지 않음, 당신은 내 대신 지옥으로 끌려가 나 만큼이나 끔찍한 모습을 하게 될 겁니다.”
그러자 여관주인이 돈을 돌려줌과 동시에 웃돈까지 쳐주며 제발 이 일을 비밀로 해달라 사정했어요, 그래서 한스는 이제 큰 부자가 되었답니다.
그는 고향에 계신 아버지에게로 출발했지요. 그러면서 여행 도중 남루한 작업복을 입고 음악을 연주하며 순회공연을 다녔는데, 음악 연주는 그가 지옥에 있는 동안 악마에게서 배웠던 거예요.
때마침 그는 그 나라의 늙은 왕 앞에서 연주를 하게 되었는데, 왕이 어찌나 그의 연주에 기뻐하시던지 자신의 큰 딸을 아내로 주겠다고 약속했지요.
하지만 그 말을 전해들은 큰 딸이 작업복이나 입은 그런 별 볼일 없는 남자와 결혼하느니 “차라리 강물 깊숙이 빠져 죽고 말겠어요.”라고 우기는 바람에, 왕은 자신의 막내딸을 그에게 주었답니다. 
막내딸은 기꺼이 아버지의 말씀에 따랐고, 그리하여 악마의 숯검댕이 동생은 이제 공주와 결혼하게 되었어요.
그런 다음 늙은 왕이 돌아가시자, 그는 온 왕국도 또한 물려받게 되었답니다. 
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「악마의 숯검댕이 동생」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「악마의 숯검댕이 동생」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter100.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



101. 곰 가죽



옛날에 병사로 입대한 한 젊은 친구가 있었습니다. 
그는 참 용감하게 행동했고, 빗발치는 총탄을 뚫고 항상 맨 앞에서 돌진을 감행했더랬죠.
전쟁이 지속되는 동안은 모든 게 평안했습니다, 하지만 평화가 성사되자 그는 해고를 통보받았죠.
중대장(대위)은 “이제 좋을 대로 가도 좋다”라고 말했어요.
하지만 그의 부모님은 이미 돌아가신 상태여서 그에겐 더는 집이 없었지요. 그래서 자신의 형제들을 찾아가 “묵게 해달라”고 “전쟁이 다시 터질 때까지만 있자”고 빌었지요.
하지만 형제들은 몰인정하게 말했지요.
“우짜자고? 네가 할 줄 아는 게 뭐 있다고? 이젠 네 스스로 살아가 보거라.”
병사가 가진 거라곤 자신의 총 한 자루 밖에 없었죠. 그는 그걸 어깨에 메고 세상으로 나아갔어요.
그가 드넓은 황야에 들어섰어요. 거긴 정말이지 나무들이 원을 그리며 황야를 두르며 있고 아무 것도 없었지요.
그가 상심에 겨워 나무 밑에 가 앉으며 자신의 운에 대해 생각하기 시작했어요.
‘돈은 없고.’라며 그가 생각했어요. ‘배운 거라곤 싸우는 거뿐이고, 어디도 나를 받아주려는 데는 없네. 굶어죽을 날이 ’선하다 선해‘(보인다 보여).’
그때 별안간 바스락 거리는 소리가 들려 그가 뒤돌아보니 한 낯선 사나이가 그의 앞에 서 있지 뭐예요.
그는 초록색 외투를 입고 있었는데 위엄 있어 보였어요. 하지만 그의 갈라진 발굽을 보니 섬뜩하더군요. 
“네가 뭘 바라는 지 난 이미 다 안다.”라며 그 사내가 말했어요. “금이나 재물을 주꾸마, 원하는 대로 가져가라, 하지만 우선 네가 겁쟁이가 아니란 것을 확인해야겠다, 내 돈을 엉뚱한 놈에게 줄 순 없으니까.”
“군인과 두려움이… 가당키나 하세요?”라며 그가 대답했어요. “당장 증명해 보여드리죠.”
“멀리 갈 것도 없지, 자 그럼,”라며 그 사내가 대답했어요. “네 뒤를 돌아보거라.”
병사가 고개를 돌려보니 큰 곰 한 마리가 으르렁거리며 그들을 향해 달려오고 있었어요.
“오호!”라며 병사가 소리쳤어요. “네 놈 코를 납작하게 해주마, 그럼 찍 소리도 못할 게다.”
그가 그 곰을 조준하더니 코 부분에 한 방을 먹였어요.
곰은 쓰러지더니 꿈쩍도 하지 못했죠.
“잘 봤다,”라며 낮선 사나이가 말했어요. “네 용기에 관해서라면 두 말할 필요도 없겠군, 하지만 네가 충족시켜야할 조건이 하나 더 있다.”
“내 구원(죄로부터의 구원)을 앗아가려는 거라면.”라며 병사가 대꾸했어요. 이때쯤에는 병사도 이미 자기 앞에 서 있는 이 자의 정체(악마)를 간파한 상태였거든요.
“만약 그런 거라면, 난 하지 않을 테요.”
“잘 생각해봐 네가 할 거라곤,”라며 초록색 코트가 대답했어요. “앞으로 7년 동안 절대 씻지 않는 것, 그리고 수염을 깍지 않을 것, 머리카락도 마찬가지, 그리고 손톱을 깍지 않을 것, ‘주기도문’(기도)을 외우지 않을 것이다. 그렇게만 하겠다면 내 너에게 외투와 망토를 하나씩 주지 넌 이걸 기간 동안 입고 다녀야 한다. 만약 7년 안에 네가 죽으면 넌 내거다. 하지만 살아남으면 넌 자유다. 그리고 평생 떵떵거리며 살 수 있을 게다.”
심각하게 생각하던 병사가 들어보니 별 거 없고 또한 전쟁터에서 워낙 생사를 건 일들을 많이 하였던 터라 이 또한 그와 마찬가지 종류의 위험일 뿐인 거 같아 선 듯 그 계약에 동의해주었어요.
악마가 자신의 초록색 외투를 벗어 병사에게 주며 말했어요.
“이 외투를 입고 손을 호주머니 속에 집어넣기만 하면 돈이 한 움큼씩 집힐 게다.”
그런 다음 그(악마)는 곰 가죽을 벗기며 말했어요. 
“이게 네 망토요, 네 침대다. 넌 여기서만 자야한다. 어떤 다른 침대에 누워선 안 된다. 이 가죽을 걸쳤으니 넌 이제부터 곰 가죽이라 불릴 게다.”
이 후 악마는 사라지고 없었어요.
병사는 그 외투를 입고 보니 호주머니에 뭔가가 느껴져 손을 넣고 보니 정말이지 뭐예요.
그런 다음 그는 곰 가죽도 걸치곤 세상으로 본격적으로 나아갔어요.
그는 즐겨웠고, 좋은 일엔 아낌없이 돈을 썼답니다.
첫 1년 동안은 그의 외모는 그래도 봐 줄만 했어요. 하지만 2년째가 되자 슬슬 괴물처럼 보이기 시작하지 뭐예요.
머리카락은 주렁주렁 내려와 온 얼굴을 다 덮었고요, 수염들은 온통 까칠까칠했고요, 손가락들엔 손톱들이 길게 달렸고요, 얼굴엔 오물이 온통 덮여 있어 ‘냉이’(=풀)를 심으면 잘 자랐을 정도였답니다.
누구든 그를 보면 달아났어요, 하지만 그는 가는 곳마다 가난한 사람들에게 돈을 주며 “7년 동안 제가 무사하게 기도해주십시오”라고 말했지요, 그리고 돈도 듬뿍듬뿍 주었기에 아직은 묵을 곳도 구할 수 있었고요.
4년 째 되는 해에, 그가 어느 여관에 들어갔더니, 그 주인이 그를 절대 안 받겠다고 하며 “마구간도 내줄 수 없어요. 말들도 놀랄 거란 말입니다.”라고 하지 뭐예요.
하지만 곰 가죽이 호주머니에서 금화를 두둑이 내보이니, 주인이 마음이 바뀌어서는 ‘별채’(본건물과 별도로 있는 집건물)에 방을 하나 그에게 내어 주었어요.
하지만 곰 가죽은 약속해 주어야했어요. 남들 눈에 보이지 않게요. 왜냐면 여관에 나쁜 평판이 붙을 수가 있었거든요.
저녁에 곰 가죽이 홀로 그렇게 앉아 얼른 7년이 끝이 나기를 간절히 바라고 있는데, 옆방에서 크게 한탄하는 소리가 들리지 뭐예요.
그가 동정심에 문을 열고 보니, 어느 노인이 두 손으로 머리를 감싼 채 통렬히 울고 있었어요.
곰 가죽이 다가가자, 그 남성은 벌떡 일어나 도망치려했어요.
마침내 곰 가죽의 목소리를 듣고서야 그리고 곰 가죽이 하는 친절한 말들을 듣고서야, 노인은 마음을 추스르고 자신의 슬픔의 원인들을 입에 담았답니다.
재산이 차츰 줄더니 급기야는 그가 자신의 딸들과 함께 굶어죽게 생겼다는 거예요. 급기야 너무 가난해 여관주인에게 방세도 내지 못해 감옥에 갈 처지에 놓였다는 거지요.
“문제가 그거뿐이라면,”라며 곰 가죽이 말했어요. “돈은 제게 많거든요.”
그는 여관주인을 불러 방세를 지불하고, 이 가난한 노인의 호주머니에도 금화가 가득 든 지갑 하나를 넣어드렸어요.
가난으로 인한 모든 문제가 해결된 것에 노인이 어찌나 기뻐하던지요.
“나랑 갑시다.”라며 그가 곰 가죽에게 말했어요. “내 딸들은 하나같이들 예쁘다오. 그 애들 중 하나를 자네 아내로 맞으시구려. 당신이 나를 도왔다는 소리를 들으면, 그 애들도 마다하지 않을 겝니다. 당신 모습이 좀 낯선 건 사실이지만, 그 애들도 곧 당신 내면을 보게 될 거유.”
이 간청에 못 이겨 곰 가죽이 따라 갔어요.
큰 딸은 그(곰 가죽)를 보자마자 그(곰 가죽)의 얼굴에 기겁을 하곤 비명을 지르며 달아났어요. 
둘째 딸도 서 있다 그(곰 가죽)를 머리끝에서 발끝까지 훑더니 이내 말했어요.
“사람의 몰골이 아닌데 어떻게 남편으로 받아들어요? 차라리 털을 깍은 곰이 여기 있다면, 저 남자보다 훨씬 더 남편감으로 그만이겠네요. 곰이야 ‘경기병’(가벼운 차림을 말을 탄 병사)의 옷을 입히고 흰 장갑을 곰에게 씌우면 된다지만 저 남잔 그게 아니잖아요. 저토록 추해서야 어디 써먹게요.”
하지만 막내딸은 이렇게 말했어요.
“사랑하는 아빠, 곤란에 처한 아빠를 도우셨다면 좋은 분일 거예요. 그리고 아빠가 신붓감을 주시겠다고 약속했으면, 그 약속은 지켜져야 하고요.”
곰 가죽의 얼굴에 잔뜩 붙어 있던 먼지와 머리카락에 동정심을 느꼈던 거지요.
하지만 그 탓에 그녀의 말을 듣고 그가 어찌나 기뻐했는지 아무도 볼 수 없었지만요.
그(곰 가죽)가 자신의 손가락에서 반지를 하나 꺼내 둘로 쪼개 그 반을 그녀에게 주고 나머지 하나는 자신이 간직했어요.
하지만 그는 자신의 이름을 새겨 반지를 그녀에게 주었고, 그녀의 이름을 반지에 새겨 자신이 가졌지요. 그리곤 “그 반지 조각을 잘 간직해주시오.”라고 말했지요.
그런 다음 그는 작별인사를 했어요.
“저는 아직 3년을 더 떠돌아다녀야하오. 그러고 나서도 돌아오지 못하면 당신은 자유요, 왜냐면 내가 죽었다는 증거이니. 그러니 내가 무사할 수 있게 하느님께 기도해주시구려.”
불쌍한 약혼녀는 완전히 검정색인 옷을 입었어요. 그리고 미래의 신랑이 생각날 때면 눈물을 훔쳐야했답니다.
이런 막내에게 두 언니들은 경멸과 조롱을 가득 던졌어요.
“조심해라,”라며 큰 언니가 말했어요. “네가 손을 내밀면, 그가 손톱으로 확 찌를지 몰라.”  
“봐라!”라며 둘째 언니가 말했어요. “곰들은 달콤한 걸 좋아하잖니, 이제 넌 그가 마음만 내키면 당장에 꿀꺽 삼켜버리고 말 거다.”
“넌 이제 그가 하자는 대로 해야 해,”라며 큰 언니가 말했어요. “안 그럼 그가 맨날 으르렁거릴 테니까.”
둘째 언니가 계속 말했어요.
“결혼식도 얼마나 즐거울까, 세상 오만 곰들이 다 모여 춤을 춰 될 테니.”
신부는 말없이 언니들이 자신을 놀리게 놔두었지요.
한편 곰 가죽은 이 곳 저 곳을 돌며 세상을 방랑하고 다니며 할 수 있는 한 선행을 베풀었고 가난한 자들을 도우며 자신(곰 가죽)을 위해 기도해 달라 부탁드렸죠.
오래지 않아 강풍이 휘몰아치더니 악마가 아주 화가 단단히 난 얼굴로 그(곰 가죽)의 앞에 서 있었어요.
악마는 그(곰 가죽)의 옛날 외투를 곰 가죽에게 집어 던지며 자신의 초록색 외투를 돌려 달라 말했지요.
“아직 다가 아니잖아요,”라며 곰 가죽이 대답했어요. “먼저 저를 깨끗이 씻겨주셔야죠.”
그래서 좋든 싫든 악마는 어쩔 수 없이 물을 떠와 곰 가죽을 씻겨주고 머리를 빗어주고 손톱을 깎아주어야 했답니다.
그 후, 곰 가죽은 용맹한 병사로 보였답니다. 전보다 훨씬 더 잘 생긴 남자로 태어났지요.
악마가 그렇게 가버리자, 곰 가죽은 기분이 아주 홀가분해졌어요.
그는 도시로 들어가 좋은 ‘벨벳’(짧고 고운 털) 외투를 사 입고 네 마리 흰 말이 끄는 마차를 타고 신부의 집으로 향했어요.
아무도 그를 알아보지 못했답니다. 
아버지는 사위를 귀한 장군님으로 착각해 자신의 딸들이 앉아 있는 방으로 안내했지요.
그는 두 언니들 사이에 앉아야 했어요. 그녀들이 강권했거든요. 그녀들이 그에게 포도주를 주고, 좋은 고위 부위를 주었지요. 그녀들은 세상에 이보다 더 잘생긴 남자는 없을 거라 생각했어요.
하지만 신부는 검은 옷을 입은 채 반대편에서 앉아 눈도 들지 못하고 입도 벙긋하지 못하고 있었어요.
결국 그가 먼저 아버지에게 “따님들 중 한 분을 제게 아내로 줄 수 있느냐?”고 물었어요.
그러자 두 언니들이 냉큼 일어나더니 자신들의 침실로 가서 서둘러 예쁜 드레스를 꺼내 입고 그들 각자가 신붓감으로 선택되는 상상을 했어요.
그리하여 신부랑만 남게 된 그 손님이 자신의 반지 반쪽을 끄집어내 포도주 잔에 담곤 그 잔을 그녀 쪽으로 내밀었어요.
그녀가 그 포도주를 집었어요. 하지만 그녀가 마실 때 잔 바닥에 반지 반쪽이 들어있는 걸 발견하곤 그녀의 심장이 쿵쾅쿵쾅 뛰기 시작했지요.
그녀가 목에 두르고 있던 리본에서 나머지 반지 반쪽을 꺼내더니 맞추어 보았어요. 두 조각들이 정확하게 일치를 하였답니다.
그때 그가 말했어요.
“내가 바로 당신과 약혼한 신랑이오, 당신이 곰 가죽이라 여겼던 사내 말이오, 하지만 하느님께서 도우사 난 이제 사람의 모습으로 돌아오게 되었고 다시 한 번 깨끗이 씻을 수 있었다오.”
그가 그녀에게로 가더니 안아주고 키스를 해주었어요.
한편 두 언니들은 드레스를 완전히 갖춰 입고 돌아오다, 막내가 그 훈남(잘생긴 사람)을 차지한 것을 보았지요. 또한 그가 예전의 그 곰 가죽이란 것을 듣고는, 그녀들은 완전히 꼭지가 돌아 분통을 터뜨리고 말았어요.
그녀들 중 한 명은 우물에 빠져 죽었고요, 다른 한 명은 나무에 스스로를 매달아 죽었어요.
밤에 누군가가 문을 노크하는 소리가 들려, 신랑이 열어주었더니, 초록색 외투를 입은 악마가 서 있다 이렇게 말하는 거예요.
“어이 보게나, 자네의 영혼 대신 지금 두 사람의 영혼을 얻어 가는 길이라네!”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「곰 가죽」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「곰 가죽」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter101.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



102. 굴뚝새와 곰



여름에 한번은 곰과 늑대가 숲을 거닐고 있었어요. 그때 곰의 귀에 어느 새가 아름답게 노래하는 게 들렸어요.
곰이 말했어요.
“늑대 동생, 무슨 새가 노래를 저리도 잘하는 거야?”
“저건 새들 중의 왕(굴뚝새)이야,”라며 늑대가 말했어요. “우리 저 녀석 앞에서 무릎 꿇고 절해야하지.”(서양에서 절을 하는 경우는, 노예가 왕에게 절하는 경우와 같이 받아들임. 절대 절 안함)
하지만 사실 그 새의 이름은 굴뚝새였답니다.
“그렇담,”라며 곰이 말했어요. “그 분의 궁전으로 봐두고 싶은 걸. 어서 나를 저리로 데려다줘 봐.”
“당치도 않는 소리하시네,”라며 늑대가 말했어요. “그래도 어쨌든 왕비(굴뚝새의 아내)가 올 때까지 기다려봐.”
그 후 곧 왕비가 부리(입)에 먹이를 좀 물고 도착했고, 곧이어 왕(굴뚝새)도 도착했지요.
그들이 어린 새끼들에게 먹이를 먹이기 시작했어요.
곰은 한달음에 달려가 보고 싶었지만, 늑대가 한사코 곰의 소매를 잡고 늘어지며 말하는 바람에 못했죠.
“아, 이 형 정말 막무가내네, 글쎄 왕과 왕비가 다시 날아가버릴 때까진 기다려야한다니까 그러네.”
그래서 곰과 늑대는 둥지가 있는 그곳을 눈여겨 봐둔 후 자리를 떴죠.
하지만 곰은 도무지 자기 눈으로 직접 그 궁전을 보기 전까진 편히 쉴 수가 없어 한달음에 다시 그곳으로 달려가보았답니다.
때마침 왕과 왕비는 날아가 버린 뒤라, 곰이 둥지 안을 엿보았더니 고작 다섯 또는 여섯 마리의 어린 굴뚝새들만이 자리해 있지 뭐예요.
“이 까짓게 궁전이라고?”라며 곰이 소리쳤어요. “이 초라한 곳이 궁전이라니, 그리고 너희들도 왕의 자녀들 일리 없어, 참말로 추레한(남사스러운) 아이들이!”  
그 말을 들은 어린 굴뚝새들이 발끈해 고함을 질러댔어요.
“아냐, 우린 추레하지 않아! 우리 부모님은 정직하신 분들이라고! 곰, 너 두고 봐!”
이 일로 곰과 늑대는 점점 불안해지기 시작해 방향을 돌려 자신들의 굴들로 들어가 버렸답니다.
하지만 어린 굴뚝새들은 계속해서 비명과 고함을 질러대며, 자신들의 부모님들이 먹이를 물고 올 때마다 이렇게 말했죠.
“아냐, 하나도 안 먹을 거야, 우리가 훌륭한 아이들인지 아닌지 확실해질 때까진 굶을 거라고. 곰이 여기 와서 우릴 모욕했단 말이야!”
그러자 나이 든 왕이 말했어요.
“안심해라, 내 기필코 그 녀석이 벌 받게 해줄 테니.”
그는 자신의 왕비와 함께 곰의 동굴로 날아가 곰을 불렀어요.
“늙은 잔소리꾼아, 왜 가만 있는 내 아이들을 모욕했어? 피 흘리는 전쟁을 해서라도 네 놈이 고통 받게 할 테야.”
그런 까닭에 곰에 대한 전쟁이 선포된 것이죠. 곰 쪽에서는, 이 전쟁에 모든 네 발 달린 짐승들, 수소, 당나귀, 암소, 사슴, 그리고 지상에서 사는 여타 다른 모든 동물들이 참가했어요.
굴뚝새 또한 하늘에 날아다니는 모든 동물들을 소집했지요. 큰 새 작은 새 할 거 없이, 그리고 작은 곤충과, 말벌과, 파리(날아다니는 파리)까지 올 수 있는 건 다 참가했답니다.
전투가 다가오자, 굴뚝새가 적의 사령관이 누군지 알아보기 위해 스파이들을 내보냈어요.
가장 교활한 모기는 적들이 모여 있는 숲으로 잠입하는 데 성공해 암호(보초병이 사용하는 암호)가 적혀 있는 나무 잎사귀 아래에 몸을 숨겼답니다.
그 나무 앞에 곰이 서 있다가, 여우를 앞으로 불러내며 말했어요.
“여우야, 넌 우리들 동물들 중에서 가장 영리하잖니, 그러니 네가 우리의 장군이 되어 우리를 이끌어줘.”
“좋아,”라며 여우가 말했어요. “그럼 신호는 어떻게 정할 건데?”
당연히 동물들이 그걸 알 턱이 없었죠. 
그래서 여우가 말했어요.
“난 털이 복스러운 꼬리를 가지고 있잖니, 빨간색 깃털들이 풍성하게 난 꼬리말이야. 내가 이 꼬리를 까짓것 위로 치켜들면 모두 앞으로 나아가는 것으로 하자, 하지만 내가 이 꼬리를 아래로 내리면 모두들 까짓것 달아나라고.”
성공적으로 정보를 수집한 모기가 다시 날아와 주도면밀한 굴뚝새에게 모든 걸 까발렸어요.
날이 밝자, 전투는 시작되었죠.
모든 네 발 짐승들이 땅이 진동하는 고함을 질러대며 앞 다투어 돌진해왔어요.
반대쪽에선 굴뚝새가 자신의 군대를 이끌고서 윙윙거리고 허공을 가르며 날아왔고, 결국 두 진영이 뒤엉키며 사방은 그야말로 아수라장이 되어, 두 진영은 서로 상대방을 물리치지 못하고 있었어요.
그때 굴뚝새가 “여우 사령관의 꼬리 밑으로 기어들어가 따끔한 한 방을 먹이거라”라는 엄명을 말벌에게 내려 보냈답니다. 
말벌에게 한 방 쏘인 여우는 흠칫 놀라 자신의 다리 한 짝을 들어올렸어요, 꼬리가 너무 아파서요.
하지만 꾹 참았죠, 사령관이니까요. 즉 여우가 아직은 하늘 높이 꼬리를 치켜든 상태였답니다.
그때 말벌이 두 번째로 또 한 방을 쏘자, 여우는 저도 모르게 순간 꼬리를 내리고 말았죠.
게다가 말벌이 쉬지 않고 세 번째로 또 한 방을 쏘자, 여우는 더는 참지 못하고 비명을 내지르며 두 다리 사이로 꼬리를 집어 넣고 말았어요.
그걸 본 동물들은 ‘우리가 졌구나’라고 생각하고서 달아나기 시작해 각자 자신들의 굴 속으로 쏙 들어가버렸답니다.
결국 새들이 전쟁에서 승리한 것이죠.
그런 다음 왕과 왕비(굴뚝새)는 자신들의 아이들에게 날아가 소리쳤어요.
“얘들아, 기뻐해라, 까짓것 먹고 마시렴, 우리가 전쟁에서 승리했단다!”
하지만 어린 굴뚝새들은 이렇게 말했답니다.
“곰이 우리 둥지로 와서 싹싹 빌며 우리보고 ‘너희들은 경이로운 아이들이야’라고 할 때까진 입도 대지 않겠어요. 우리도 죽기 살기라고요.”
그러자 굴뚝새가 곰의 굴로 날아가 외쳤어요.
“잔소리꾼아, 너 우리 애들이 있는 둥지로 가져야겠다, 가서 그 애들에게 용서를 빌어. 그렇지 않음 내가 네 녀석의 갈빗대를 모조리 부숴주고 말테니까.”
그리하여 곰은 크나큰 두려움에 떨며 거기까지 기어가 싹싹 빌어야했답니다.
그제야 어린 굴뚝새들도 마침내 만족해하며 다같이 모여 앉아선 먹고 마시며 밤이 늦도록 즐거워했답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「굴뚝새와 곰」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「굴뚝새와 곰」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter102.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



103. 달콤한 오트밀 (맛있는 죽)



가난한데 착하기만 한 소녀가 엄마와 함께 살고 있었어요. 그리고 먹을 게 다 떨어지고 말았죠. 
그래서 딸아이는 숲 속으로 들어갔어요. 그러다 그녀(딸아이)의 슬픔을 잘 아는 나이 든 노파 한 명을 만났죠.
노파가 작은 냄비를 하나 주며 말했어요.
“‘요리해, 작은 냄비야, 요리하렴.’라고 말하면 맛있고 달콤한 ‘오트밀’(=귀리가루+소금+설탕+우유)이 만들어질 게다. 
그리고 노파가 계속 말하길,
“‘그만 만들렴, 작은 냄비야.’라고 말하면 그만 만들어질 게다.”
라고 했어요.
소녀가 그 냄비를 집으로 들고 가 엄마에게 주었어요.
그때부터 그들은 가난과 허기짐에서 벗어날 수 있었답니다. 언제든 원할 때면 달콤한 오트밀을 먹을 수 있었기 때문이지요.
그러던 하루는 소녀가 외출을 했을 때, 엄마가 말했어요.
“요리해, 작은 냄비야, 요리하렴.”
그러자 그녀가 마음껏 먹을 때가지 냄비가 죽을 요리해냈어요.
그러다 그만 먹고 싶어서 요리되는 걸 멈추려는데, 무슨 말을 해야 냄비가 요리를 멈추는지 모르겠는 거예요.
그 바람에 냄비가 요리를 계속 했고 그럴수록 오트밀이 이제 냄비 가장자리를 넘어 부엌과 온 집에 가득 차기 시작해 옆집에까지 넘어가더니 기어이 온 거리에 넘치기 시작했어요.
이런 식이라면 온 세상의 배고픔을 달랠 때까지 오트밀이 차고 넘칠 거 같았죠. 
누구도 요리를 멈추게할 방법을 몰랐어요.
마침내 집 딱 한 채만 남게 되었을 때, 외출 했던 딸아이가 때마침 집에 도착해 말했어요.
“그만 만들렴, 작은 냄비야.”
그러자 오트밀도 이동을 멈추었고 냄비도 요리를 멈추었어요.
그래서 누구든 마을로 돌아오려는 사람은 달콤한 오트밀을 배터지도록 먹으며 길을 내야했답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「달콤한 오트밀 (맛있는 죽)」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「달콤한 오트밀 (맛있는 죽)」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter103.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



104. 영리한 사람들



어느 날 농부가 구석에서 개암나무 회초리를 집어 들며 자신의 아내에게 단단이 일렀어요.
“트리네(여자이름), 내가 시골에 내려가 봐야하니까 한 3일 정도는 못 돌아올 거야. 그 동안 가축상인이 와서 암소 세 마리를 사가겠다고 하면, 한 번에 팔아버려. 하지만 절대 은화 2백 개 밑으론 받으면 안 돼, 그럼 절대 안 된다고, 알겠지?”
“알았으니까 여행이나 잘 다녀오세요.”라며 부인이 대답했어요. “제가 다 알아서 할게요.”
“당신은, 정말,”라며 남편이 말했어요. “어린 아이였을 때 머리를 부딪쳐 이후 지금까지도 영향을 받아오고 있잖아, 그러니 내 단단히 이르는 거야, 이번에도 또 바보처럼 굴면, 내가 돌아와 시퍼렇게 응 색칠이 아니라 정말 시퍼렇게 만들어놓을 줄 알아, 내 이 손으로 몽둥이처럼 때려서 말이야, 그럼 1년이 지나도록 멍이 사라지지 않을 테니 알아서 해.”
이 말을 남기고 남편은 길을 떠났답니다.
다음 날 아침 가축상인이 왔기 때문에, 부인으로선 두 번 부를 필요도 없었죠.
그는 암소들을 보고 가격을 듣더니 말했어요.
“기꺼이 사 가리다, 정직하게 말해서, 딱 그 가격에 해당하는 소들이거든요. 그럼 내 한번에 짐승들을 끌고 가리다.”
그가 고리를 풀더니 외양간에서 암소들을 끌고 나와 막 출입문을 나서려고 했어요.
그때 다급히 부인이 그의 소매를 붙잡더니 말했지요.
“은화 2백 개는 지금 주셔야죠, 안 그럼 암소들을 끌고 가시면 안 돼요.”
“참말로,”라며 그 남자가 말했어요. “깜빡하고 돈주머니를 안 차고 왔지 뭐요. 걱정마쇼, 내 지불 대신 담보물을 맡기고 갈 테니, 내가 지금 암소 두 마리만 끌고 나고 나머지 한 마리는 두고 가리다, 당신에게 이만한 담보물도 없지 않겠소.”
이 말의 의미를 알아차린 아내는 그가 암소들을 끌고 가게 허락했지요.
그녀가 속으로 생각했어요.
“한스(남편이름. 독일 사람이란 뜻임)도 내가 이 일을 총명하게 해낸 걸 알면 기뻐할 거야!”
3일째 되는 날 농부가 돌아왔을 때 “암소들은 팔았소?”라고 단번에 물었어요.
“사랑하는 한스, 물론이고말고요.”라며 아내가 대답했어요. “당신 말한 대로요, 은화 2백 개를 받고 팔았답니다. 암소들이 어찌나 가치가 없었던지, 그가 군소리 안하고 끌고 가던걸요.”
“그래 돈은 어딨소?”라며 농부가 물었어요.
“오, 돈은 안 받았어요.”라며 아내가 대꾸했어요. “돈주머니를 깜빡 잊고 안 차고 왔다고 하지 않겠어요, 하지만 곧 가져다 준데요, 왜냐면 든든한 담보물을 맡기고 갔거든요.”
“무슨 담보물인데?”라며 남편이 물었어요.
“팔기로 한 세 마리 암소들 중 한 마리를, 나머지 두 마리 가격을 주기 전까지 두고 가기로 했거든요. 여보, 저 잘했죠, 그 암소는 어린 것이라 그 기간 동안 먹이도 적게 먹을 거 아녜요.”
벌컥 화가 난 남편이 냉큼 회초리를 집어 들고 아내의 등짝을 후려치려 했어요.
그때 별안간 그가 회초리를 내려놓으며 말했어요.
“당신은 전 세계에서 뒤뚱거리며 걷는 거위들 중에 가장 멍청한 여자야, 하지만 당신에겐 아직 분이 안 풀렸지만, 내 큰 길로 나가서 3일 동안 기다려보고 누구도 당신보다 더 어리석은 사람이 있음, 그럼 내 당신의 처벌을 면해주지, 하지만 그런 사람이 없으면, 등짝이 시퍼레지도록 두들겨 맞을 줄 알아.”
그는 가장 큰 길로 나가 돌 위에 앉아 무슨 일이 생기나 살펴보았어요(기다려보았어요).
그때 어느 농부의 짐마차(바퀴 4개)가 그 쪽으로 다가오고 있는 게 보였어요.
그 마차 한 가운데에 있는 밀짚 더미 위에 어떤 여자가 앉아 있거나 누워 있거나 아니면 황소 옆에서 같이 걸으며 가는 것이 아니라 세상에 밀짚 위에 똑바로 서 있었어요.
남자가 속으로 생각했어요.
“임자 제대로 만났군.”
그래서 냉큼 일어나 아무리 봐도 영리할 리가 없는 그 짐마차 앞뒤로 뛰어다녔어요.
“뭘 원하시나, 이 양반이?”라며 여자가 그에게 말했어요. “난 당신을 모르겠는데, 그래 어디서 오셨소?”
“하늘나라에서 방금 막 떨어졌소,”라며 남자가 대꾸했어요. “다시 돌아갈 방법이 없지 않겠소, 당신이 날 끌어올려줄 순 없지 않소.”
“없죠,”라며 여자가 말했어요. “그 방법은 없어도, 3년 전에 거기(하늘나라)로 간 내 남편이 어찌 잘 지내나 그건 당신이 확실히 알려줄 수 있을 거 같은데. 그래 혹시 내 남편을 못 보셨소?”
“오, 봤지, 그를 보고말고. 하지만 잘 지내진 못할 게요. 그는 양을 돌보는데, 이놈의 양들이 워낙에 골치라 말이지. 산 위로 뛰어올라가지 않나 황야에서 길을 잃지 않나, 그래서 그는 양들을 쫓아 뛰어 다니고 다시 몰고 오느라 식은땀을 줄줄 흘리더군. 옷도 다 헤져선 맨 살이 다 들어날 정도고 말이오. 거긴 재봉사가 없거든, 왜냐면 사도 베드로가 그들을 받아주지 않으니 말이야, 내 말이 뭔 말인지 아시겄지(아시겠지).”
“아이고 누가 그런 줄 알았는감?”라며 여자가 소리쳤어요. “내 당장 집 찬장에 걸어놓은 남편의 ‘일요일 외투’(교회에 갈 때 입는 옷)를 가져올 게요, 그거면 남편이 좀 있어 보이거든요. 그걸 좀 남편에게 가져다주시겠어요, 당신이 친절하시다면요.”
“그 참 당체 없군,”라며 농부가 말했어요. “옷은 천국에 못 들고 들어가게 해서 말이지. 성문에서 다 빼앗기거든.”
“그럼 들어봐요,”라며 여자가 말했어요. “내가 어제 고운 밀을 좀 팔아 돈을 상당히 많이 받았거든, 내 그걸 남편에게 보내지요. 그거면 당신 주머니에 숨길 수 있지 않겠어요, 그럼 아무도 당신이 숨길 걸 모를 거 아녜요.”
“아주머니 뜻이 정 그렇다면야,”라며 농부가 말했어요. “내 당신께 호의를 베풀어드리리다.”
“그럼 잠시만 여기 있어 봐요,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “내 집에 냉큼 가서 지갑을 들고 올게요, 금방 올 거예요. 가축이 가벼우라고 이렇게 밀짚 더미 위에 앉아 가는 것이 아니라 서서 가는 거거든요.”
그녀가 황소를 몰고 가자, 농부는 생각했어요.
“저 여자도 참말로 어리석음에 재능 있군, 그녀가 돈을 가져오면, 내 마누라는 땡 잡은 거지, 내가 때리지 않을 거니 말이야.”
오래지 않아 그녀가 돈을 들고 허둥지둥 도착했어요. 그리곤 그녀가 두 손에 꼭 쥐고 온 그 지갑을 그(농부)의 호주머니 속에 단단히 넣어 주었답니다.
그녀는 떠나기 전 “이 호의에 감사해요”란 말을 정말 천 번이 넘게 하고 또 하고 갔답니다.
그 여자가 집으로 다시 도착해보니, 밭일 나갔던 아들이 돌아와 있었어요.
그녀는 아들에게 생각지도 못한 일이 벌어졌다며 말했어요.
“이 얼마나 기쁜 일이니, 얘야, 운 좋게도, 아버지에게 뭔가를 보낼 기회를 얻었지 뭐니. 세상에 하늘나라 천국에서 그 이가 그리 고생을 하고 있을 줄을 누가 알았겠니?”
그 말에 아들이 화들짝 놀랐어요.
“엄마,”라며 그가 말했어요. “하늘나라에서 누가 내려오는 건 매번 있는 일이 아니잖아요, 제가 얼른 가서 그를 찾을 수 있는지 보고 올게요, 그럼 거기가 어떤지를 그가 말해줄 거잖아요, 거기건 일을 어떤 식으로 하는지 물어봐야지.”
그가 말에 안장을 얹고 초스피드로 말을 타고 출발했어요.
보니 느티나무 아래 앉아서 농부는 자신이 막 벌어들인 지갑에 든 돈을 세고 있었지요.
“혹시 천국에서 떨어지셨단 사람을 못 보셨소?”라며 젊은이가 그에게 말했어요.
“봤지,”라며 농부가 대답했어요. “거기로 돌아가겠다며 출발했는걸, 저 언덕 위로 올라가거든, 거기라면 더 쉽게 다다를 수 있다며 말이야. 자네가 얼른 말을 타고 쫓아가면 따라잡을 수도 있을 거요.”
“아아,”라며 그 젊은이가 말했어요. “제가 온 종일 밭일을 하다 이제 막 말까지 전속력으로 타고와 너무 지치고 피곤해서 그러는데, 당신이 잘 아신다니, 친절을 베푸시어 당신이 제 대신 이 말을 타고 그에게 가서 이리로 좀 와 달라 부탁해줄 수 있겠습니까.”
‘아하!’라며 농부가 생각했어요. ‘심지(초에 달린 심지에 불을 붙임)도 없이 등불 켜는 놈이 여기 또 있었군!’ 
“왜 안 되겠나? 내 어서 도와줌세.”라며 그(농부)가 말하더니 냉큼 그 말에 올라타 빠른 속력으로 사라져버렸어요.
젊은이는 밤이 다 되도록 거기서 한참을 앉아 기다렸지만, 농부는 돌아오지 않았지요.
‘천국에서 왔다는 그 분이 엄청 서두르셔서 쉽게 돌아오지 못하는 가보네.’라며 그가 생각했어요. ‘잘 됐지 뭐, 이참에 그 농부 분이 말을 내 아부지(아버지)께 가져다주었을 테니까 말이야.’
그는 집으로 와 엄마에게 자초지종을 설명하고, 자신이 아빠에게 말을 보냈기 때문에, 이제 아빠가 도망친 양들을 쫓아 이리저리 뛰어다닐 필요가 없으실 거라 말씀드렸어요.
“장하구나, 내 아들아,”라며 그녀가 대답했지요. “네 다리는 아직 ‘성하니’(탈이 없으니), 걸어 다녀도 되지 않겠니.”
농부는 집에 돌아와 그 말을, 외양간에 담보물로 있는 암소 옆에 세워둔 후, 아내에게로 와 말했어요.
“트리네(여자이름), 당신 정말 운 좋은 줄 알아, 내가 당신보다 더 어리석은 것들을 둘이나 보았거든. 그래서 이번엔 내 때리지 않을 테야. 하지만 오늘 같은 일을 또 했다간 그땐 두고 봐.”
그런 다음 그는 ‘파이프 ○배’(피우는 ○배)에 불을 피우며 자신의 푹신한 안락의자에 앉아 말했어요.
“오늘 완전 땡잡았군, 말쑥한 말 한 마리를 공짜로 얻었겠다, 돈이 두둑이 든 지갑도 받았겠다, 야윈 암소 두 마리를 잃은 대가치곤 괜찮은 거래였어. 역시 아○한(어리석은) 것들에게선 돈이 많이 생긴다니까, 난 경의를 표하고서 그걸 주워 담은 거뿐이지만 말이야.” 
물론 농부야 그런 생각을 했다지만, 그렇다고 여러분까지도 어리석은 사람들을 더 선호하리라곤 생각되지 않네요. 
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「영리한 사람들」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「영리한 사람들」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter104.html

다만 등장인물 이름만은 독일어 원문대로 해석했습니다.

「영리한 사람들」  (독일어원문. 1857년) ▶ https://de.wikisource.org/wiki/Die_klugen_Leute_(1857) 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



105. 두꺼비 이야기



첫 번째 이야기.

옛날에 어린 아이(여자아이) 한 명이 있었는데, 그 애 엄마는 매일 오후 작은 사발(그릇)에 우유와 빵을 담아 그녀에게 주었어요.
그럼 아이는 그걸 들고 마당으로 가 웅크리고 앉았지요.
하지만 한 입 먹으려고 할 때, 두꺼비 한 마리가 벽의 갈라진 틈을 통해 기어들어와 작은 머리를 접시에 담그며 그녀와 함께 먹었답니다.
아이는 이게 너무도 재밌었어요. 그래서 자신의 작은 그릇을 들고 매일 거기가 앉았죠.
그리고 한번은 두꺼비가 오지 않으면, 그녀가 노래를 불렀어요.
“두껍아, 두껍아, 이리 얼른 오려무나, 넌 작으니까, 빵 부스러기도 먹고 우유도 먹고 하려무나.”
그럼 두꺼비가 서둘러 와 맛나게 음식을 먹었답니다.
게다가 두꺼비도 감사하고 마음을 보이고 싶어졌어요. 그래서 두꺼비는 자신이 숨겨놓은 보물들 중에서 값진 걸 가지가지 아이에게 가져다주었답니다. 보석, 진주, 황금 노리개 같은 거요.
하지만 이 두꺼비는 우유만 먹고 빵 부스러기는 입도 대지 않는 거예요.
하루는 아이가 작은 스푼으로 두꺼비의 머리를 톡톡 건드리며 말했어요.
“빵 부스러기도 먹으렴, 얘야.”
그때 부엌에 서 있던 엄마가 아이가 누구에게 말을 하고 있는지 들어보니, 아이가 자기 스푼으로 두꺼비를 때리고 있지 뭐예요, 그래서 엄마는 얼른 땔나무 하나를 집어 달려가 그 착하고 귀여운 생물을 죽여버렸어요.
그때부터 아이에게 어떤 변화가 일어났어요.
두꺼비가 그녀와 함께 음식을 먹을 동안은 그녀도 쑥쑥 잘 자라고 튼튼했는데, 이제 아이의 예쁘고 불그레한 뺨이 윤기를 잃기 시작해 싹 사라져버렸어요.
오래지 않아 장례식 새(까마귀?)가 밤에 울기 시작했고요, 울새가 작은 나뭇가지와 잎사귀들을 물고 와 장례식 화환을 만들기 시작했어요.
그 후 곧 아이도 관에 눕혀졌답니다.



두 번째 이야기.


고아 아이가 담에 기대앉아 실을 만들고 있는데, 담 아래 있는 구멍을 통해 두꺼비 한 마리가 기어 나오지 뭐예요.
그래서 그녀가 재빨리, 두꺼비들이 엄청 좋아해 거기만 기어간다는 푸른 비단 손수건들 중 하나를 옆에 펼쳐주었어요.
그것을 보자마자 두꺼비가 구멍 속으로 다시 들어가더니 작은 황금 왕관을 물고 돌아와 그 손수건 위에 내려놓곤 다시 사라졌어요.
소녀가 그 왕관을 집어 들었더니 반짝반짝 빛나는 섬세한 금 세공품이었어요.
오래지 않아 그 두꺼비가 두 번째로 돌아와 보니 왕관이 안 보이지 뭐예요, 그래서 두꺼비는 담을 타고 기어 올라가 주체할 수 없는 슬픔에 겨워하며 자신의 작은 머리가 깨질 때까지 담에다 대고 때리기 시작했어요. 결국 두꺼비는 떨어져 죽고 말았답니다.
만약 소녀가 그 왕관을 그냥 그대로 두었다면, 두꺼비가 정말 구멍에서 훨씬 더 많은 보물들을 가져다주었을 텐데 말이죠.



세 번째 이야기.

두꺼비가 노래하네.
“콕콕, 콕콕.”
아이가 말하네.
“나오렴.”
두꺼비가 나오자, 아이가 자신의 어린 여동생에 관해 묻네.
“우리 빨간 양말 못 봤니?”
두꺼비가 말하네.
“응.”
“나도 못 봤는데.”
“난 네가 좋아, 콕콕, 콕콕, 콕콕.”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「두꺼비 이야기」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 다만 독일어 원문에 있는 ‘두꺼비’란 단어가 영어본에서는 ‘뱀’으로 바꿔 있기에 모두 ‘두꺼비’로 다시 고쳐 우리말로 해석했습니다.

내용 해석함 - 「뱀 이야기」(1884년 영어본)  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter105.html
단어 참조함 - 「두꺼비 이야기」(1815년 독일어 원문)  ▶ https://de.wikisource.org/wiki/M%C3%A4hrchen_von_der_Unke_(1815) 
읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



106. 불쌍한 방앗간 젊은이와 고양이



옛날에 어떤 방앗간에 나이 많은 방앗간 주인이 살고 있었는데, 그에겐 아이도 마누라도 하나도 없었고, 수습공 세 명이 일을 돕고 있었죠.
그렇게 몇 년이 지났을 때, 주인이 젊은이들에게 말했어요.
“나는 이제 늙었다, 그래서 난로 옆에 앉아 쉬고만 싶구나, 너희들은 세상에 나가 가장 좋은 말을 구해 돌아오거라, 그럼 내 그 애에게 이 방앗간을 물려주마, 다만 그 보답으로 그는 내가 죽을 때까지 돌봐주어야 한단다.” 
세 번째 젊은이는 일만 그냥 열심히 하는 스타일이고 머리를 쓰지 않아 다른 두 젊은이가 무척 깔보던 차였어요. 두 젊은이는 방앗간이 세 번째 젊은이에게 가는 걸 시기하고 절대 그럴 일은 없을 거라 생각했죠.
셋이 함께 길을 떠나 마을에 도착했을 때 두 젊은이가 바보 ‘한스’(주인공이름. 독일 사람이란 뜻임)에게 말했어요.
“넌 그만 여기 있거라, 평생 가도 말 한 마리 못 구할 텐데 무슨 모험이야.”
하지만 한스는 그들과 함께 계속 갔고 결국 밤에 자려고 어느 동굴에 들어가게 되었어요.
약삭빠른 두 젊은이는 한스가 곯아떨어질 때까지 기다리다 일어나 그냥 한스를 두고 출발해버렸어요.
두 젊은이는 자신들이 영리한 짓을 했다 생각했겠지만 어디 진짜 그런지는 두고 봐야죠.
해가 뜨고 한스가 자리에서 일어났을 때 깊은 동굴 속에 그만 혼자 덩그러니 누워 있지 뭐예요.
그가 사방을 둘러보며 탄식을 했지요.
“원, 세상에, 나만 있는 거야(여긴 어디람)?”
그런 다음 그는 일어나 동굴을 나와 숲으로 들어가며 생각했어요.
“나만 혼자 버려졌네, 이제 어떻게 말을 구한담?”
그가 이런 생각을 하며 걷는 동안, 자그마한 얼룩 고양이 한 마리가 다가와 아주 친절히 말했어요.
“이봐요, 한스, 어딜 가세요?”
“아아, 넌 몰라도 되는 일이야.”
“제가 도움이 될지 어찌 아시고요.”라며 그 고양이가 말했어요. “아름다운 말을 구하시는 거 아니었어요. 그럼 저를 따라오세요, 7년 동안 제 충실한 하인이 되어 주신다면, 그럼 제가 당신이 평생가도 구경도 못할 아름다운 말 한 필을 얻어다 드릴게요.”
‘그 참 희한한 고양일세!’라며 한스는 생각했어요. ‘어디 그 말이 사실인지 아닌지 볼까.’
그리하여 그녀(얼룩 고양이)는 그를 데리고 마법에 걸린 자신의 성으로 갔어요.
거긴 온통 그녀의 고양이 하인들뿐이었어요.
그들(고양이 하인들)은 민첩하게 계단을 아래위로 걸어 다녔고 흥겹고 행복해보였지요.
저녁에 그들이 식사를 하려고 자리에 앉자, 하인들 셋이 악기를 연주해주었어요.
한 명은 바순을 연주하고, 다른 한 명은 바이올린을 연주하고, 셋 번째 고양이는 트럼펫을 입으로 불었는데 어찌나 볼에 힘을 주고 부르는지 두 뺨이 뽈록했답니다.
식사를 마치고 식탁이 치워지자 그 얼룩 고양이가 말했어요.
“자, 한스, 저와 춤을 춰주세요.”
“아니,”라며 그가 말했어요. “암고양이와는 춤 안 출래요. 생전 한 번도 그런 적이 없걸랑요.”
“그럼 이 분을 침실로 모시거라.”라며 그녀가 고양이들에게 말했어요.
그래서 그들 중 한 고양이가 그를 침실로 안내했지요.
한 고양이가 그의 신발을 벗기고, 또 한 고양이가 그의 양말을 벗기고, 마지막 고양이가 촛불을 불어 꺼드렸죠.
다음날 아침에 그들은 다시 돌아와 그가 일어나는 걸 도와주었어요. 한 고양이가 그에게 양말을 신기고, 또 한 고양이가 양말 끈을 묶어주고, 또 한 고양이가 신발을 가져다주고, 또 한 고양이가 그를 세수해주고, 나머지 한 고양이가 그의 얼굴을 꼬리털로 말려주었죠.
“그 참 보드랍네!”라며 한스가 말했어요.
하지만 이제부터 한스는 그 얼룩 고양이에게 봉사해야했어요. 매일 나무를 자를 일을 했어요. 그 일을 할 땐 은으로 된 도끼와, 마찬가지로 은으로 된 쐐기(V자형 도구)와 톱을 지급받았고요, 구리로 된 망치를 지급받았답니다.
그렇게 그는 나무를 작게 자르며 그 집에 머물며 좋은 고기와 음료수를 먹으며 지냈답니다. 다만 그 얼룩 고양이와 그녀의 하인들 밖에는 아무도 못 봤죠.
하루는 그녀가 그에게 말했어요.
“가서 제 풀밭에서 잔디를 베어 말려주세요.”
그러면서 그녀는 그에게 은으로 된 낫과 금으로 된 숫돌을 주며 소중히 다루다 꼭 돌려달라 말했지요.
그래서 한스가 거리로 가 시킨 일을 다 하고 작업을 마친 다음 그 낫과 숫돌과 건초를 집에 가지고 왔지요.
그런 다음 한스는 그녀보고 “제 보수는 언제 주실 거죠? 아직 멀었나요?”라고 물어보았어요.
“아뇨,”라며 그 얼룩 고양이가 말했어요. “우선 저를 위해 한 가지 일을 더 해주셔야 해요. 여기 은으로 된 목재와, 목수의 도끼와 직각자와 그 외 필요한 은들이 다 있으니 이걸로 제게 작은 집을 지어주세요.”
그러자 한스가 작은 집을 지었어요. 하지만 그가 이렇게 시키는 일들을 다 했지만 그는 여전히 말 한 마리 구경해본 적도 없었죠.
그럼에도 불구하고 7년이란 시간은 마치 6개월마냥 후딱 지나가 버렸답니다.
얼룩 고양이가 그에게 “제(얼룩 고양이) 말들을 보시고 싶으시죠?”라고 물었어요.
“네.”라며 한스가 말했어요.
그런 다음 그녀가 그 작은 집의 문을 열었어요. 그녀가 문을 열었을 때 거기엔 열두 마리의 말들이 서 있었답니다. 너무도 화사하게 빛이 나는 훌륭한 말들을 보고 있자니 한스의 마음이 뛸 듯이 기뻤어요.
이제 그녀가 그에게 먹을 것과 마실 것을 챙겨주며 말했어요.
“집으로 가세요, 당신이 말을 끌고 가게 하지 않고, 제가 삼일 내로 당신을 뒤따라가 그때 같이 말도 드릴게요.”
그리하여 한스가 출발했지요. 그녀가 그에게 방앗간까지 가는 길을 알려주었거든요.
하지만 그녀는 한스에게 새 옷을 주진 않았어요, 그냥 올 때 입고 왔던 남루한 작업복을 입고 가게 했지요. 그 작업복은 7년이란 세월을 그와 함께 하며 그의 몸에 너무 작게 변해 있었어요.
그가 집에 돌아왔을 때쯤, 다른 두 수습공들도 마찬가지로 돌아왔어요. 그들은 각자 말을 끌고 왔지요. 그들 중 한 마리는 눈이 멀었고, 다른 말은 다리를 절뚝거렸어요.
그들이 한스에게 “네 말은 어디 있는데?”라고 물었어요.
“삼일 내로 오기로 했어.”
그러자 그들이 실컷 비웃으며 말했어요.
“정말 멍청한 한스라니까, 지 말이 삼일 내로 온데?”
“정말 좋은 말이라고!”
한스가 거실로 들어서자, 방앗간 주인이 식탁에 못 앉게 했어요. 왜냐면 한스가 입고 있던 누추한 옷이 너무 낡았기에 그런 자를 집에 들이는 게 부끄럽다는 이유에서였어요.
그래서 그들은 한스에게 음식을 양껏 주며 밖으로 내보냈어요. 밤에 누워 쉬어야 할 때가 되자, 다른 두 젊은이는 한스를 침대로 들이지 않았어요. 그래서 한스는 결국 거위 우리(집)로 비집고 들어가 딱딱한 밀짚 위에서 잠을 자야했답니다.
아침이 되어 그가 깨어나 보니, 벌써 삼일이 후딱 지나간 상태였고, 여섯 필의 말이 끄는 마차가 한 대 도착했는데, 어찌나 환히도 빛이 나던지요!
하인 한 명이 일곱 번째 말을 또한 끌고 왔어요. 그게 바로 불쌍한 방앗간 젊은이(한스)의 것이었죠.
근사한 공주님이 마차에서 내려와 방앗간 안으로 드셨어요, 이 공주님은 불쌍한 한스가 7년간 봉사했던 바로 그 자그마한 얼룩 고양이님이셨답니다.
그녀가 방앗간 주인에게 “방앗간 젊은이이자 일꾼(한스)은 어디 계신가요?”라고 물었어요.
그러자 방앗간 주인이 말했어요.
“저희는 그를 방앗간 안으로 들일 수 없었습니다. 그가 너무도 남루한 옷을 입고 있기에요. 그는 지금 거위 우리에서 자고 있습니다.”
그래서 공주님은 그들보고 가서 그를 당장 데려오라 일렀어요.
그들이 그를 데려왔을 때, 그는 몸에 작은 작업복으로 몸을 감추느라 꼭꼭 옷매무새를 당겨야했답니다.
하인들이 짐 보따리를 풀어 화사한 의사들을 꺼내고, 그를 씻기고 입혔어요. 그 모두를 마치자, 어느 왕보다 더 잘생긴 남자가 서 있었답니다.
그런 다음 아가씨(공주님)는 다른 두 수습공들이 데려온 말들을 보고 싶다 말씀하셨어요.
그래서 보았더니 말 한 마리는 눈이 멀었고 또 한 마리는 다리를 절뚝거렸어요.
그녀가 하인보고 일곱 번째 말을 데려오라 명하셨어요.
그 말을 본 방앗간 주인은 “내 생전 이렇게 훌륭한 말이 우리 집에 들어온 적은 없었소.”라고 말했어요.
“저게 방앗간의 세 번째 젊은이의 것입니다.”라고 그녀가 말했어요.
“그에게 이 방앗간을 물려주겠소.”라고 방앗간 주인이 말했어요.
하지만 공주님은 말도 거기 두시고 그리고 방앗간 또한 그(방앗간 주인)가 계속 가지고 있게 하시곤, 다만 충직한 한스만 데리고 마차에 태워 돌아가셨답니다.
한스가 은제 도구들로 지었던 그 작은 집으로 그들이 돌아와 보니 거기엔 웅장한 성이 서 있었고, 그 성 안의 모든 것은 금과 은이었어요.
그런 다음 공주님은 그와 결혼식을 올렸답니다.
그는 이제 부자가 되었어요. 평생 돈을 펑펑 쓰도 남을 정도의 큰 부자가 되었죠.
이제 아셨죠, 누구든, 아무리 그가 어리석더라도 절대 훌륭한 사람이 되지 말란 법은 없답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「불쌍한 방앗간 젊은이와 고양이」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「불쌍한 방앗간 젊은이와 고양이」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter106.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



107. 두 나그네



언덕과 골짜기가 만나는 법은 없지만, 착한 사람과 나쁜 사람이 만나긴 하는 법이죠.
한번은 구두장이(구두를 만드는 사람)와 재봉사가 서로 여행 도중 만나게 되었지 뭐에요.
재봉사는 항상 명량하고 즐거움 가득한 잘생긴 청년이었답니다.
재봉사가 보니 맞은편에서 구두장이가 오고 있지 않겠어요. 딱 봐도 그가 구두장이란 게 표가 나는 게, 그가 짊어지고 있는 가방을 보고 알 수 있었죠.
살짝쿵 놀리고 싶은 마음이 든 재봉사가 구두장이를 향해 노래를 불렀답니다.
“이음매를 꿰매고, 실을 잡아당기고, 피치(석유 찌꺼기. 구두에 물이 안 들어오게 하는 거 같음)를 바르게나, 그리곤 못을 탕탕 박게나.”
하지만 그 일로 먹고 사는 구두장이에겐 그 노래가 농담으로 다가오질 않았죠.
그래서 그가 식초를 삼킨 듯 얼굴이 잔뜩 일그러져선 당장에라도 재봉사의 목덜미를 움켜쥘 자세를 갖추는데.
작은 친구(재봉사)가 웃기 시작하더니 술병을 꺼내며 말했어요.
“농담일세, 이거나 한 잔 들게, 기분을 누그러뜨려줄 걸세.”
구두장이가 한 번 잔뜩 마시고 나니 얼굴의 폭풍우도 싹 사라지고 말았지요.
그가 술병을 재봉사에게 돌려주며 말했어요.
“정중히 말하네만, 목이 말라 말 안하는 사람은 있어도, 술 마시고 말 적게 하는 사람은 없다지. 어때 우리 함께 여행할까?”
“그 좋지,”라며 재봉사가 대답했어요. “자네가 큰 도시로 갈 참이라면 말일세, 거긴 일감이 적을 리 없으니까.”
“나도 참 거기로 가려던 참이네,”라며 구두장이가 대답했어요. “작은 시골은 벌이가 안 되거든, 시골에선 사람들이 맨발로 다니는 것도 좋아하니 말일세.”
그리하여 그들은 함께 앞으로 나아갔어요, 그들은 모습은 마치 눈 속을 헤치며 가는 족제비 두 마리 같았답니다.
둘 다 쉬지 않고 열심히 걸은 결과 도시에 도착했고 그 길로 각자 자기 직업의 장인들을 찾아다녔지요.
원체 사람 좋아 보이고 명량하며 두 뺨이 발그레한 재봉사에겐 모든 이들이 금방 일감을 주러했어요. 운이 좋을 때면, 주인집(직장 사장님) 따님들이 문까지 마중 나와 키스 사례를 주곤 했을 정도니까요. 
구두장이와 다시 만났을 때, 재봉사의 짐(돈)은 두둑했답니다.
까다로운 구두장이는 얼굴이 일그러지며 생각했어요.
‘나쁜 자들일수록 운은 더 좋다더니.’
그러거나 말거나 재봉사는 웃기 시작하며 노래를 부르며 자신의 동료에게 벌이를 나누어주었답니다.
재봉사는 호주머니에서 동전 서너 개라도 짤랑짤랑 거리면 거나하게 주문을 하며 까짓것 기분 좋을 때까지 술잔을 기울였답니다. 쉽게 벌어 쉽게 쓴다가 그의 생활신조였지요.
그들은 얼마동안 여행하다 수도(서울)로 가려면 반드시 지나야하는 울창한 숲에 도착했지요.
하지만 그들 앞에는 작은 길이 둘 놓여 있었죠. 하나는 7일이 걸리는 길이었고, 다른 하나는 2일이 걸리는 길이었죠. 하지만 도무지 어느 쪽 길이 더 짧은 길인지는 알 수 없었어요.
그들은 떡갈나무 아래에 자리를 잡고 앉아 어떻게 할지 의논을 교환했어요. 며칠 걸릴지를 예상하고서 빵을 가져가야했거든요.
구두장이가 말했어요.
“돌다리도 두들겨보고 가랬어, 난 1주일 치 빵을 가져 갈 테야.”
“원 세상에!”라며 재봉사가 말했어요. “1주일 치 식량을 등에 지고 축 쳐져 가라고, 그랬다간 주변 경관 구경도 못한다고. 난 하느님을 믿으니 잘못 될 리 없어! 호주머니 속에 있는 돈은 여름이건 겨울이건 멀쩡하지만, 빵은 더운 날씨엔 마르고 곰팡이까지 핀다고. 게다가 빵을 넣고 갔다간 폼도 안 나. 그런 걸 우리가 왜 굳이 1주일 치나 가져가야해. 2일 치 빵이면 충분해.”
그러하여 각자 자기 몫의 빵을 샀고, 운은 숲에서 확인해보기로 했지요.
숲은 예배시간만큼이나 고요했지요. 바람 한 점 없었고요, 졸졸 흐르는 개울물도 없었고, 노래하는 새도 한 마리 없었어요. 두터운 이파리 때문에 햇살도 들지 않는 숲이었어요.
잔득 찌푸린 얼굴로 땀이 숭숭 내리는 구두장이는 등에 진 짐이 너무도 무거워 한 마디도 하지 않았어요.
하지만 짐이 가볍던 재봉사는 한껏 흥겨워져 사방으로 폴짝폴짝 뛰어다니며 이파리로 휘파람을 불며 노래를 부르며 속으로 생각했지요.
‘역시 하느님도 내가 행복해하는 걸 보고 싶으셨던 거야.“
그렇게 2일이 지나고, 숲에서의 3일째 날이 되었는데도 숲이 끝나지를 않았어요. 재봉사는 가져간 빵을 다 먹고 말았죠. 그래서 재봉사는 무엇보다 마음이 1미터는 가라앉는 느낌이었어요.
그러는 사이에도 재봉사는 용기만은 잃지 않았답니다. 자신의 운과 하느님을 믿었으니까요.
그레도 셋째 날 저녁이 되자 재봉사는 허기가 져 나무 아래 드러눕고 말았죠.
배고픔이 다음 날 아침까지도 계속되었지만 그는 다시 일어났답니다. 
그렇게 넷째 날이 다 가고, 구두장이는 쓰러진 나무 위에 걸터앉아 자신의 저녁을 게걸스럽게 먹는 동안 재봉사는 바라만 보아야했지요.
재봉사가 “빵을 조금만 달라”고 간청하면, 구두장이는 한껏 비웃으며 이렇게 말했지요.
“그동안 넌 한껏 즐거웠지, 이제 너도 한 번 슬퍼봐라. 아침 일찍 지저귀는 새가 저녁엔 매에게 잡아먹히는 법이지.”
즉 그는 무자비한 사람이었던 거예요.
하지만 다섯째 되는 날엔 재봉사도 더는 정말이지 일어날 수가 없었어요. 너무도 허약해져 말 한 마디 중얼거릴 수 없었죠. 그의 뺨은 창백했고, 눈은 새빨게져 있었어요.
그때 구두장이가 재봉사에게 말했어요.
“오늘은 내가 빵을 좀 주지, 하지만 그 대가로, 내가 너의 오른쪽 눈알을 뽑겠어.”
불쌍한 재봉사로선 살려면 거기에 응하는 수밖에 없었죠. 그는 한 차례 펑펑 운 다음 눈을 내밀었어요.
그러자 마음이 돌덩이처럼 차가운 구두장이가 날카로운 날로 재봉사의 오른쪽 눈알을 끄집어냈어요.
재봉사는 자신이 어릴 적에 식료품 실에서 음식을 몰래 꺼내먹다 들켰을 때, 엄마가 하셨던 말씀이 떠올랐어요.
“먹었으니 이제 맞아야지.”
재봉사는 가련한 빵을 먹고 나자 그래도 두 다리로 다시 설 수 있어 자신의 비참함을 잊고 그나마 한 쪽 눈이라도 볼 수 있는 것에 만족해했답니다. 
하지만 여섯째 날 배고픔이 다시 그를 덮쳐 심장까지 삼키려들었죠.
저녁에 어느 나무 아래에 쓰러진 그는 일곱 째날 아침 너무도 허약해져 도저히 혼자 힘으로는 일어설 수가 없었어요. 죽음이 가까이 온 것이죠.
그때 구두장이가 말했어요. 
“내 자비를 베풀어 빵을 주지, 하지만 세상에 공짜는 없는 법, 네 나머지 눈까지 도려내겠어.”
재봉사는 자신이 그동안 생각 없이 산 것을 느끼고 하느님께 용서기도를 드린 후, 구두장이에게 말했어요.
“하란 대로 하마, 감내할 일이라면 감내하겠다. 하지만 주된 하느님께선 결코 좌시하지 않으실 게다. 내가 네게 결코 소홀히 대하지 않았는데도, 네가 이리도 악하게 구는 것에 대한 벌을 받을 날이 올 게다. 내가 잘 나갈 때 난 내 몫을 항상 너와 나누었다. 내 일은 바늘 한 땀 한 땀이 서로 맞아야한다. 이제 내 한쪽 눈까지 뽑히고 더는 앞을 볼 수 없게 되면 난 구걸을 해야 해. 그러니 내가 앞이 안 보이고 나면 부디 혼자 남겨두지만 말아다오, 안 그럼 난 굶어죽게 될 거야.”
하지만 구두장이란 자는 애초에 자신의 심장에서 하느님을 몰아낸 자였지요. 그래서 식칼을 꺼내 재봉사의 왼쪽 눈마저 뽑아내버렸어요.
그런 다음 구두장이가 재봉사에게 빵 한 조각을 주고, 지팡이를 쥐어주곤, 그를 끌고 갔지요.
해가 질 무렵, 그들은 그제야 숲을 빠져나왔어요. 그들 앞에는 드넓은 들판이 펄쳐져 있는데 거기에 교수대들이 서 있었어요.
구두장이는 눈먼 재봉사를 거기로 데리고 가더니 재봉사만 혼자 남겨놓곤 자기 갈 길을 가 버렸어요.
지치고, 고통 받고, 허기진 나머지 가련한 재봉사가 잠이 들고 말았어요. 그는 밤새도록 잠이 들었죠.
새벽 동이 틀 무렵 그가 깨어보니 도무지 여기가 어딘지 알 길이 없는 거예요.
교수대들에 매달려 있던 두 죄수들 머리에 까마귀가 한 마리씩 앉아 있었어요.
그때 목이 매달린 자들 중 한 명이 말을 하기 시작했어요.
“잘 잤나, 아우?”
“네, 잘 잤수다.”라며 두 번째 죄수가 대답했어요. 
“말할 게 있네,”라며 첫 번째 죄수가 말했어요. “오늘 밤사이에 교수대에서 우리 위로 떨어져 맺힌 이슬로 다시 앞을 보고 싶은 자들의 소망을 이루어줄 수 있다네. 눈먼 자가 이 사실만 알면, 믿기지 않을 정도로 시력을 회복할 수 있는데 말이야.”
이 말을 들은 재봉사가 자신의 손수건을 꺼내 잔디에 눌렀더니 이슬로 촉촉해졌어요. 그걸로 눈구멍을 닦았답니다.
그 즉시 교수대에 매달린 자들의 말이 현실화되어, 눈구멍들에서 새롭고 건건한 눈 두 개가 생겨났어요.
머지않아 재봉사의 눈에 산 너머의 해가 떠는 게 보였어요.
그리고 자기 앞 평지엔 웅장한 성문들과 수백 개의 탑들 그리고 그 뾰족탑들 위에 달린 황금 공들과 십자가들이 막 빛을 반사하기 시작하는 가운데 거대한 왕도(수도 서울)가 눈에 들어왔어요.
좀 더 있자니 나무와 잎사귀들을 구별할 수 있게 되었고, 새들이 지나가고 작은 곤충들이 공중에서 춤을 추고 있는 게 보였어요.
그가 즉시 호주머니에서 바늘을 하나 꺼집어내어 바느질을 해보았더니 정말 예전처럼 잘 되는 바람에, 심장이 쿵쾅 거럴 정도로 기뻤답니다.
그가 급히 무릎을 꿇고 앉아 다시 한 번 자비를 베풀어주신 하느님께 감사기도를 드리고 그 참에 아침기도까지 드렸지요.
그는 또한 시계의 흔들리는 추처럼 바람에 서로 나부끼며 매달려 있는 불쌍한 죄수들을 위해서도 기도를 올리는 걸 잊지 않았답니다.
그런 다음 그는 자신의 짐보따리를 등에 이고 마음의 고통도 금세 잊고서 흥얼흥얼 콧노래를 부르며 길을 나아갔답니다.
그가 첫 번째로 마주친 것은, 드넓은 들판에서 사방으로 뛰어다니고 있는 갈색 망아지(어린 말)였어요.
말갈기를 잡는데 성공한 그가 올라타고서 도시로 가려고 했지요.
그러자 망아지가 놓아달라며 사정하며 말했어요.
“전 아직 어려서,”라며 망아지가 말했어요. “가벼운 재봉사라도 저를 타시는 날엔 제 등짝이 부러져 두 동강이 나고 말 거예요, 그러니 제가 다 자랄 수 있도록 놓아주세요. 놓아주시면 이 은혜는 잊지 않고 나중에라도 갚아드릴게요.”
“그래 가거라,”라며 재봉사가 말했어요. “내가 봐도 네가 어리긴 어리구나.”
재봉사가 망아지의 등짝을 한 번 때려주자, 망아지가 기뻐서 뒷다리로 서더니 폴짝폴짝 뛰어 산울타리와 도랑을 넘어 빠른 걸음으로 들판으로 사라져버렸어요.
하지만 몸집이 작은 재봉사는 어제부터 아무 것도 못 먹던 참이었죠.
“눈이 시뻘게졌네,”라며 그가 말했어요. “먹을 빵 하나도 없는데. 이제라도 처음 마주치는 것은 뭐든 먹고 봐야겠다.”
그러는 사이 황새 한 마리가 풀밭 너머로 도도하게 걸어오고 있었어요.
“멈춰, 멈추라고!”라며 재봉사가 소리치더니 황새 다리를 낚아채버렸어요.
“네가 먹기 좋은지 아닌지는 모르겠다만 나도 너무 배가 고파 참을 수가 없구나, 네 목을 잘라 너를 구워서라도 먹어야겠다.”
“제발 그러지 마세요,”라며 황새가 대꾸했어요. “저는 인간들에게 큰 이익을 가져다주는 신성한 새라 누구도 제게 해코지를 한 적이 없어요. 그러니 저를 놓아주세요. 그럼 다음에 언제라도 이 은혜를 꼭 갚아드릴게요.”
“그렇담, 가 보거라, 긴다리 친구,”라며 재봉사가 말했어요. 
황새가 몸을 일으키더니 다리를 늘어뜨리곤 유유히 날아가버렸어요.
“이러다 정말 골로 가겠어?”라며 재봉사가 마침내 속삭였어요. “배고픔은 점점 더 심해지는데, 위는 가면 갈수록 텅 비었어. 이번엔 정말 뭐가 오던 잡아먹을 거야.”
그 순간 연못에서 헤엄치고 있던 아기 오리 두 마리가 그에게로 다가오는 게 보였어요.
“네 이놈들 잡았다.”라며 그가 소리치며 한 마리를 잡아 목을 비틀려했어요.
그 순간 갈대 사이에 숨어 있던 엄마 오리가 화들짝 놀라 비명을 지르며 헤엄쳐오며 애가 타게 자신의 귀여운 아기를 살려 달라 빌었어요.
“한 번 생각해보세요,”라며 엄마 오리가 말했어요. “누군가가 당신을 잡아 마지막 일격을 가하려는 모습을 보게 된다면 당신 엄마가 얼마나 슬프시겠어요?”
“그만해,”라며 원체 마음씨가 고운 재봉사가 말했어요. “네 아이를 놓아줄 테니까.”
그가 포로를 다시 물가에 놓아주었어요.
그가 돌아서는데, 앞에 손이 부분적으로 빈 늙은 나무 한 그루가 서 있고 벌들이 윙윙거리며 날아다니고 있는 게 보였어요.
“저기 내 선행에 대한 보답이 있구나,”라며 재봉사가 말했어요. “저 꿀을 먹으면 기운이 날 거야.”
하지만 여왕벌이 나오더니 그를 위협하며 말했어요.
“제 백성들에게 손 끝 하나 까딱하시거나 저희 보금자리를 파괴하셨다가는 수만 개의 따끔한 벌침들이 당신 피부를 관통할 줄 아세요. 하지만 평화롭게 저희를 두고 당신 길을 가신다면, 다음 기회에 이 은혜를 저희들이 꼭 갚아드리겠습니다.”
이리 되니 재봉사로서도 별 수가 없었죠.
“세 번 다 허탕치고 그것도 모자라 이제 네 번째로 허탕 치는 식사네!”
그가 굶주린 배를 부여잡고서 몸을 간신히 끌고서 도시로 들어갔어요.
때마침 낮12시 종이 울렸지요. 다행히도 그가 도착한 여관에 음식상들이 다 차려져 있어서 (돈이 있던) 그가 바로 앉아 허기를 달랠 수 있었답니다.
배부르게 먹고 나자 그가 말했어요.
“이제야 좀 살겠네, 일자리를 구하러 가봐야지.”
그는 도시를 두루 돌아다니며 고용주(사장님)를 찾아보았답니다. 곧 좋은 일자리를 구할 수 있었죠.
하지만 그가 워낙에 자기 직업에 도통한 실력자인지라 유명해지는 건 금방이었어요.
모두가 이제 이 몸집 작은 재봉사가 만든 새 외투를 입고 싶어하다보니 그의 유명세를 나날이 더해갔죠.
“솜씨가 크게 는 것은 아닌데,”라며 그가 말했어요. “나날이 바느질이 잘 돼.”
그러다 마침내는 왕이 그를 궁중 재봉사로 임명하기에 이르렀지요.
그런데 세상에 참 이렇게 기구한 우연이 또 있을까요! 아 글쎄 똑같은 날 그의 옛 동료였던 구두장이도 또한 궁중 구두장이로 임명되었던 거예요.
구두장이는 재봉사를 다시 보고, 재봉사의 두 눈에서 건강한 새 눈이 다시 생겨난 것을 알게 되어 구두장이는 양심의 가책을 느끼게 되었죠.
‘그 놈이 내게 복수할 게 분명해.’라며 구두장이가 속으로 생각했어요. ‘그렇다면 내가 먼저 제 놈 무덤을 파주지.’
하지만 다른 사람 눈에 눈물 나게 한 자는 결국 자기 눈에 피눈물을 흘리게 되는 법이죠.
저녁에 근무시간이 끝나고 어둠이 자욱이 깔려갈 때, 구두장이가 왕에게 몰래 가 말했어요.
“왕이시어, 재봉사는 건방진 자입니다. 옛날에 사라진 황금 왕관(왕이 머리에 쓰는 거)을 자신이 되찾을 수 있다 뽐내고 다닌다고 합니다.”
“그래주면야 나야 좋지.”라며 왕이 말했어요. 
그래서 왕은 다음 날 아침 재봉사를 불러 황금 왕관을 즉시 되찾아 올 것을 지시내렸어요.
“만약 찾지 못하겠다면 영원히 이 도시를 떠나거라.”
‘아니 이런!’라며 재봉사가 생각했어요. ‘가질 수 있는 걸 바래야지. 확실히 왕은 사람이 할 수 없는 걸 내게 요구하고 계셔. 새벽이 되기 전에 여길 떠나야겠다. 그래서 오늘 안으로 도시를 빠져나가야겠어.“
그가 자신의 짐보따리를 챙겨 성문을 빠져나가는데, 정말이지 큰 행운을 준 도시를 포기하고 가려니 시원섭섭해 미칠 지경이었어요.
그가 예전에 오리들과 인연을 맺게 된 그 연못에 다다랐죠. 그 순간 물가에 앉아 부리(입)로 몸단장을 하고 있던 엄마 오리가 그를 즉시 알아보곤 ”왜 그리 안색이 안 좋으세요?“라고 물어왔어요.
“제게 닫친 불행을 듣게 된다면 당신도 기가 차실 거예요.”라며 재봉사가 자신이 처한 운명을 들려주었어요.
“그거라면,”라며 엄마 오리가 말했어요. “저희들이 도와드릴 수 있어요. 그 황금 왕관은 물속에 빠졌답니다. 지금 이 바닥 아래에 놓여 있죠. 우리들이 즉시 다시 끌어올려줄게요, 당신을 위해서요. 그 동안 당신은 둑에 손수건을 꺼내 펴놓고 계세요.”
그녀는 자신의 열 두 어린이 오리들과 함께 다이빙을 하더니 5분 후 엄마 오리의 날개로 황금 왕관을 떠받치며 수면 위로 떠올랐어요. 그리고 사방에서 헤엄치며 어린이 오리들도 자신의 부리(입)로 엄마를 도와 왕관을 떠받치며 운반을 도왔었요.
오리들이 물가로 헤엄쳐 오더니 손수건에 왕관을 내려놓았어요.
햇살에 반사돼 붉은빛을 띤 수만 가지 갈색 빛을 내는 그 황금 왕관이 어찌나 훌륭하든지 여러분은 상상도 못하실 거예요.
재봉사는 손수건의 네 모서리를 묶어 그 왕관을 왕께 가지고 왔어요. 
왕은 기쁨에 가득차 재봉사의 목에 황금 목걸이 하나를 걸어주었죠.
자신의 일격이 꺼꾸러진 것을 본 구두장이가 두 번째 음모를 꾸미곤 왕께 가 이렇게 아뢰었어요.
“왕이시어, 재봉사가 또 거들먹거리기 시작했다고 합니다. 궁전 전체를 밀랍(꿀벌이 벌집을 만들 때 분비하는 물질)으로 완벽하게 만들 수 있다면서요. 궁전에 속한 느슨하고 단단한 모든 것과 궁전의 안과 밖 모든 것을 만들 수 있다고 떠들어대고 있습니다요.”
왕이 사람을 보내 재봉사를 다시 불러오게 한 다음 “온 궁전을 밀랍으로 똑같이 만들게, 그 속에 있는 하나하나 다 똑같이, 움직이는 것이건 움직이지 않는 것이건, 안에 있는 것이건 안에 없는 것이건 똑같이 만들게. 만약 이행하지 못하거나 벽에 박힌 못 하나라도 모자랐다가는 평생 지하 감옥에서 갇혀 살게 될 줄 알거라.”라고 엄포를 내리셨어요.
재봉사가 생각했지요.
‘정말 갈수록 가관이군! 더는 어떻게 참아?’
재봉사는 미리 챙겨놓은 짐보따리를 등에다 짊어메고서 달아났답니다.
그렇게 속이 빈 나무에 도착해 자리를 잡고 고개가 축 쳐져 있자니, 꿀벌들이 윙윙 왔다갔다 하는 거 같더니, 곧 여왕벌님이 나오셔서 그에게 물었어요.
“왜 그렇게 고개를 떨구고 계세요, 목이 경직되서 그러신 건가요?”
“아아, 그게 아니예요,”라며 재봉사가 말했어요. “짊어진 짐의 무게가 너무 무거워 그래요.”
그러면서 그는 왕이 자신에게 요구하는 게 너무 커서 그렇다며 자초지종을 들려주었답니다.
꿀벌들이 윙윙거리며 자기들끼리 윙윙거리더니 곧 여왕벌이 다시 와서 말했어요.
“그거라면 일단 집에 돌아가 계세요. 내일 이맘때에 여기로 다시 와주세요, 오실 땐 큰 시트를 가져오세요, 그럼 모두 다 잘 되어 있을 거예요.”
그래서 그는 방향을 돌려 되돌아갔고, 그때부터 벌꿀들은 열심히 궁전으로 날아가 열린 창문들 사이로 들어가고 사방으로 기어다니며 궁전의 모든 걸 꼼꼼히 조사했더랬죠.
그런 다음 서둘러 돌아와 아주 빠른 속도로, 마치 모형이 저절로 자라나는 것처럼, 밀랍으로 궁전으로 만들어내기 시작했답니다.
저녁까지 모든 작업을 마쳤죠.
다음날 아침에 재봉사가 도착했을 땐, 화려한 궁전이 작은 크기로 고스란히 거기 놓여 있었답니다. 벽에 박힌 못 하나하나 지붕에 놓인 타일(기왓장) 하나하나까지 모자람이 없었죠. 
그 모형이 어찌나 정교한지 눈처럼 하얗고 꿀처럼 달콤함 향이 나는 그런 모형이었답니다.
재봉사는 그 모형을 가지고 간 천으로 조심스레 감싼 다음 왕께 가지고 갔어요.
왕은 너무 좋아 미칠 지경인지라 그 걸 궁전 대형 홀에 전시해두게 하고, 재봉사에겐 선물로 큰 석조 건물 집을 한 채 지어주었답니다. 
하지만 사악한 구두장이도 포기하지 않고 세 번째로 왕께 나아가 아뢰었어요.
“왕이시어, 성의 뜰에서 물 한 방울 나지 않는다는 소리를 듣게 된 재봉사가 ‘나라면 수정처럼 맑은 물을 사람 키만 한 높이까지 뜰 한 가운데서 솟아나게 할 수 있다’며 자랑 질을 해대고 있나이다.”
그러자 왕은 즉시 재봉사를 대령하라 이르곤 말했어요.
“네가 약속한 대로 내일까지 성 안뜰에 물줄기가 솟아나게 해보거라, 만약 사람 키 높이에서 조금도 모자랐다간 그 길로 네 목이 달아날 줄 알거라.”
이제 불쌍한 재봉사로선 따지고 자실 것도 없었죠. 최대한 빨리 성문을 빠져나가 도망치는 수밖에는요. 이건 얼굴에서 눈물 흐르고 말고의 문제가 아니라 죽고 사는 문제였으니까요.
그렇게 재봉사가 풀이 팍 죽어 걸어가고 있는데, 예전에 자신이 놓아준 그 망아지가 이제 아름다운 밤색 어른 말이 되어 그에게로 폴짝폴짝 뛰어오고 있었어요.
“때가 됐답니다,”라며 그 말이 재봉사에게 말했어요. “당신의 착한 행동에 대한 보답을 이젠 할 수 있어요. 당신이 무엇 때문에 그러는지 잘 알아요, 제가 도와드릴게요. 자 제 등에 올라타세요. 이젠 어른 두 명도 거뜬히 태울 수 있을 만큼 컸답니다.”
재봉사가 다시 용기를 내 폴짝 뛰어 말 등에 올라탔더니, 말이 전속력으로 도시로 되돌아가더니 성의 안뜰에 도착했어요. 
말은 안뜰 주변을 마치 번개처럼 빠르게 두 번 돌더니, 세 번째 때 격렬하게 퍽 쓰러졌어요.
하지만 그와 동시에 끔찍한 천둥소리가 우르르쾅쾅 한 번 울리더니, 안뜰 한 가운데의 땅이 두 쪽으로 갈라지며 공중으로 대포알 같은 물기둥이 온 성을 젖실 기세로 솟아났어요. 그 후 물줄기는 말 등에 탄 재봉사의 키만큼 조정이 되었죠.
정말이지 수정처럼 맑고 고운 물이 햇살을 받아 춤을 추는 그 모습은 볼만했죠.
그걸 본 왕조차도 하도 어이가 없어 부하들이 모두 쳐다보는 데도 재봉사에게 달려가 얼싸안았을 정도였답니다.
하지만 행운만 계속 될 순 없었죠.
왕에겐 딸들이 많았답니다. 모두 하나같이 절세미인들이었지요. 네, 왕은 아들이 없었어요. 
그래서 악랄한 구두장이가 네 번째로 왕께 나아가 아뢰었어요.
“왕이시어, 재봉사의 오만함이 그치질 않았나이다. 그는 지금 ‘내가 마음만 먹으면 하늘에서 아드님을 왕께 가져다드릴 수 있다.’라고 떠벌리고 다니고 있사옵니다.”
왕이 당장 명령을 내려 재봉사를 부르라 했어요.
왕이 말했어요.
“9일 내로 아들을 내게 데려오거라, 그럼 내 큰 딸애를 네 아내로 주마.”
‘이번 건 보상도 엄청 크지만,’라며 몸집이 작은 재봉사가 생각했어요. ‘바랄 걸 바래야지, 이번 건 내가 할 수 있는 일이 아냐. 다행히 열매를 따러 올라간다 해도 도중에 나뭇가지가 부러져 떨어져 죽고 말 거라고.’
그는 집으로 간 다음 자신의 작업 책상 위에 다리를 쪼개고 앉아 이 일을 대체 어찌하면 좋을지 곰곰이 생각에 생각을 거듭하고 있었죠.
“정말 모르겠다,”라며 마침내 그가 소리쳤어요. “달아나는 수밖에. 여기선 정말이지 마음 편히 살 수가 없어.”
그가 자기 짐보따리를 챙겨 성문을 허겁지겁 빠져나갔지요.
그가 풀밭에 도착해보니, 자신의 옛 친구인 황새가 마치 철학자처럼 풀밭 앞뒤로 걸어다니고 있는 게 보이지 뭐예요.
이따금씩 그 황새는 멈춰서더니 잘 살핀 다음 개구리를 집어 꿀꺽하고 삼키곤 했죠.
그를 발견한 황새가 반가워했어요.
“어,”라며 황새가 말했어요. “등에 웬 짐이세요. 도시를 떠나시게요?”
재봉사가 황새에게 왕이 요구한 것을 얘기했어요.
“난 정말 어찌할 줄을 모르겠단다, 그래서 내 불행이 너무 슬퍼.”
“그런 일로 골머리를 앓으시다니요,”라며 황새(남자 황새)가 말했어요. “그렇지 않아도 제가 당신을 어려움을 알고 찾아가려던 참이었어요. 오랫동안 저는 천(갓난아기를 둘둘 감은 천)에 감싸인 아이들을 마을로 데려다주고 있었어요. 가끔씩은 샘에서 왕자님을 건져올리곤 하지요. 일단 집에 가 쉬고 계세요. 오늘로부터 9일째 되는 날에 제가 궁으로 찾아뵐게요.”
그래서 작은 재봉사는 집으로 갔지요.
약속할 날 재봉사는 성에 있었어요.
머지않아 황새가 저쪽에서부터 날개를 날아오더니 창문을 똑똑 두드렸어요.
재봉사가 창문을 열자, 긴 다리 친구가 조심해가며 안으로 들어오더니 보드라운 대리석 (바닥에 까는 고급 돌) 바닥 엄숙하게 밟으며 나아갔어요.
자세히 보니, 황새의 부리(입)엔 천사처럼 사랑스러운 아가야가 한 명 있는데 왕비를 향해 작은 두 손을 내밀고 있지 뭐에요.
황새가 왕비의 무릎에 아가야를 내려놓자, 왕비는 아기를 쓰다듬고 입맞춰주며 좋아서 어쩔 줄을 몰라하고 있었죠.
황새는 날아가기 전에, 자신의 등에 이고 온 여행 가방을 풀어 왕비에게 건네주었어요.
그 안엔 다양한 색깔의 캔디들과 함께 작은 종이 꾸러미들이 들어 있었답니다. 귀여운 공주님들이 나눠가지게 되었죠.
하지만 큰딸은 그거 아무것도 가지지 않았어요. 대신 그녀는 명량한 재봉사를 남편으로 가지게 되었답니다.
“그 참,”라며 재봉사가 말했어요. “이제 보니 내가 가장 큰 상을 탔네 그래. 그러고 보니 ‘항시 하느님을 믿고 사는 사람에겐 늘 복이 따르고 실패할 리 없다’더니 어릴 적 우리 엄마가 해주신 말씀이 하나도 틀린 게 없네 그래.”
사랑스런 구두장이가 결혼식 축하연에서 신고 춤을 출 구두를 구두장이는 만들어 주어야했답니다. 그런 다음 영원히 그 도시를 떠나란 명령이 구두장이에게 내려졌지요.
숲으로 가는 길에 구두장이는 예전 그 교수대에 이르게 되었어요.
화, 흥분, 더위에 지친 그가 교수대 밑에 몸을 던지고 막 자르고 눈을 감는데, 교수대에 매달려 있던 죄수의 머리 위에 앉아 있던 두 까마귀들이 푸드덕 날아와 구두장이의 두 눈을 쪼아 먹고 말았답니다.
미치고 만 구두장이는 숲으로 뛰어 들어갔는데, 거기서 그는 굶주림 끝에 죽었을 것임이 분명해요. 왜냐면 이후 아무도 그를 봤다거나 그에 대한 소식을 들었다는 사람이 없었거든요. 
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「두 나그네」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「두 나그네」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter107.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



108. 고슴도치 한스



옛날에 돈과 땅을 풍성하게 가진 농부가 살고 있었어요.
가진 게 어찌나 부자인지 남부러울 게 없었지요. 하지만 딱 하나 그의 행복에서 부족한 게 있었는데 그건 바로 자식이 한 명도 없다는 거예요.
그래서 그가 종종 다른 농부들과 함께 읍내(도시)로 갈 때면, 그들로부터 “넌 왜 아이가 없냐?”며 놀림을 받곤 했지요.
마침내 그도 화가나 집으로 돌아와선 말했어요.
“고슴도치라도 좋으니, 나도 아이를 가졌으면.”
그런 다음 그의 아내가 아이를 배더니 출산을 했는데, 아이 몸의 위쪽 부분은 고슴도치이고, 아래쪽 부분은 사내아이였어요.
아내가 아이를 보곤 기겁을 해 말했어요.
“봐요, 당신이 그 말을 하는 바람에 우리에게 불행이 닫쳤잖아요.”
그러자 남자가 말했어요.
“이제 어쩌겠소? 어쨌든 아이 세례식을 해야 할 거 아니요. 그나저나 누가 저런 아이의 ‘대부’(세례식 때 참석하는 남성후견인)가 되어줄까 걱정이네.”
여자가 말했어요.
“이리된 마당에 ‘고슴도치 한스’라고 이름 지어줄 수밖에 없겠네요.”
아이가 세례식을 받을 때, 목사님께서 말씀하셨어요.
“아이의 가시 때문에 평범한 요람(아기침대)에선 눕힐 순 없겠구먼.”
그래서 난로 뒤에 밀짚을 조금 깔고 고슴도치 한스를 거기 눕혔지요.
엄마가 젖을 먹일 순 없었어요, 왜냐면 아기의 가시들이 그녀를 찌르기 때문이지요.
그렇게 아이는 난로 뒤에서 8년을 살았지요.
그의 아빠는 아이가 진절머리가 나 생각했어요.
‘죽어줬으면!’
하지만 아이는 죽지 않고 거기서 나름 잘 지냈지요.
한번은 읍내(도시)에서 장(시장)이 열려, 농부가 막 가려다, 아내에게 “돌아올 때 무얼 사다주면 좋겠소?”라고 물었어요.
“살림에 쓰게 고기 조금과 하얀 롤 빵(긴 빵) 두서너 개만 사다줘요.”라며 그녀가 말했어요.
그런 다음 농부는 하녀에게도 물었고, 하녀는 “슬리퍼와, 사람얼굴들이 그려진 긴 양말이 몇 개 필요해요.”라고 말했죠.
마지막으로 농부가 또한 말했어요.
“그래 넌 뭘 가질 거냐, 고슴도치 한스야?”
“사랑하는 아빠.”라며 그가 말했어요. “백파이프(가죽부대 피리. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/sEqHfJ )를 사다주세요.”
그리하여 귀가할 때 아빠는 아내에겐 아내가 원하던 고기와 하얀 롤빵들을 주었고, 하녀에겐 슬리퍼와 사람얼굴들이 그려진 긴 양말을 주었고, 마지막으로 난로 귀로 가서 고슴도치 한스에게 백파이프를 주었답니다.
백파이프를 가지게 되자 고슴도치 한스가 말했어요.
“사랑하는 아빠, 대장간에 가셔서 수탉에게 신발을 신겨주세요. 그럼 제가 그걸 타고 가 다신 돌아오지 않을 게요.”
이 말을 들은 아빠는 그를 떠나보낼 수 있다는 생각에 기뻐하며 수탉의 발에 신반을 신겨 주었지요. 일이 다 끝나자, 고슴도치 한스는 수탉을 타고 가버렸어요. 하지만 그냥 가진 않고 떠날 때 숲에서 키울 목적으로 돼지와 당나귀들을 끌고 갔답니다.
거기 도착하자 그는 수탉을 시켜 그를 태우고 높은 나무 위로 날아오르게 하곤 긴 한 해(1년)를 거기 앉아 자신의 당나귀들과 돼지를 지켰죠. 결국 짐승의 떼가 무척 늘어났는데, 그의 아빠는 이 사실을 모르고 계셨죠.
그는 나무에 앉아 백파이프를 연주했어요. 연주소리가 너무도 아름다웠답니다.
한번은 왕이 여행도중 그 음악을 듣게 되었어요.
깜짝 놀란 왕이 하인을 앞으로 보내, “주변을 돌아오고 이 음악이 어디서 나는 건지 알아보고 오거라”라고 말했지요.
하인이 여지저기 돌아봤는데도 높은 나무 위에 앉아 있는 자그마한 동물밖에 보이지 않았어요. 그건 마치 수탉 위에 올라탄 고슴도치가 이 음악을 연주하는 듯 보였지요.
그러자 왕이 그 하인에게 다시 가서 “그가 거기 왜 앉아 있으며 행여 내 왕국으로 가는 길을 아는지 물어 보거라.”라고 말했어요.
그래서 고슴도치 한스(한스는 ‘독일사람’이란 뜻임)는 나무에서 내려와,
“왕께서 궁전 안마당에 도착했을 때 가장 먼저 마중 나오는 것을 그게 무엇이든 제게 주시겠다고 서약서를 써주시면 길을 알려드리겠나이다.”
라고 말했어요.
그때 왕은 생각했어요.
‘서약서를 써주는 거야 쉽지. 고슴도치 한스는 글자를 모르니 말이야.’
“좋다. 내 써주마.”
그래서 왕은 펜과 잉크를 가져오게 해 뭔가를 적어주었어요. 
그 일이 다 끝나자, 고슴도치 한스가 왕에게 길을 가르쳐주었고, 왕은 안전하게 집에 도착할 수가 있었죠.
하지만 그의 딸은 아빠가 오는 것을 보자마자 반가운 마음에 달려와 아빠를 맞이하며 키스를 해주었어요. 
그때 왕이 비로소 자신이 고슴도치 한스와 했던 약속이 떠올라, 딸에게 그동안 있었을 일을 말해주고, 자신이 집에 왔을 때 가장 먼저 마중 나오는 것을 그게 뭐든 그에게 주기로 했다는 말을 했지요. 그는 마치 말을 타고 있듯 수탉 등에 올라타 있던 아주 낯선 동물인데 아름다운 연주를 하더라고 말해주었지요. 
하지만 왕은 서약서를 적어줄 때, 고슴도치 한스가 적어달란 내용을 적지 않고 그가 원하는 것을 가져선 안 된다는 엉뚱한 내용을 적었었지요.
그런 까닭에 공주는 기뻐하며 아빠가 일을 잘 처리하셨다 말씀드렸죠. 왜냐면 그런 고슴도치에겐 절대 시집가고 싶은 마음이 공주에겐 없었거든요.  
여하튼, 고슴도치 한스는 자신의 당나귀들과 돼지들을 돌보며 나무 위에 앉아 항상 명량하게 백파이프를 연주하였더랬죠.
그러다 우연히도 이번엔 또 다른 왕이 자신의 수행원과 심부름꾼들과 여행을 왔다 길을 잃어 어떻게 하면 이 울창한 숲에서 다시 빠져나가 집으로 갈 수 있을지를 몰라 하고 있었죠.
그도 마찬가지로 어디슨가에서 들려오는 아름다운 연주를 듣고 심부름꾼에게 “이게 어인 일인지 알아보고 오거라.”라고 시켰죠. 
그 심부름꾼이 나무 아래에 가서 보니 맨 꼭대기에 수탉이 앉아 있고 그 수탉 위에 고슴도치 한스가 앉아 있지 뭐예요.
심부름꾼이 “거기서 뭐하요?”라고 물었어요.
“내 당나귀들과 돼지들을 지키는 중이오. 당신은 뭘 바라시오?”
사자(심부름꾼)는 “우린 지금 길을 잃어 왕국으로 가는 길을 몰라 하고 있소. 당신이 길을 좀 알려줄 수 있겠소.”라고 말했어요.
그런 다음 고슴도치 한스는 수탉을 타고 그 나무에서 내려와 나이든 왕에게 자신이 길을 알려줄 테니 다만 왕이 궁전 앞에 도착했을 때 무엇이든 가장 먼저 마중을 나오는 것을 자신에게 달라고 말했어요.
왕이 “좋네.”라고 말하고 고슴도치 한스에게 약속대로 하겠다는 서약서를 적어주었어요.
그 일이 다 마치고 나자, 한스가 수탉을 타고 왕 앞에 앞장을 서며 길을 알려주었고, 왕은 안전하게 자신의 왕국에 도착할 수 있었답니다.
왕이 안마당에 도착해 크게 기뻐하고 있는데, 무척이나 아름다운 자신의 외동딸이 달려 나오며 아빠의 목을 감싸 안고 나이 드신 아빠가 다시 돌아온 것을 기뻐했어요.
“대체 왜 이리 늦으신 거예요?”라고 그녀가 물었어요.
그래서 왕은, 딸에게 길을 잃은 일이며 한참을 헤매다 울창한 숲에 들어가게 된 일이며 반은 고슴도치인데 반은 사람인 생물체가 수탉을 타고 높다란 나무 꼭대기 위에 앉아 연주를 하는데, 도와달라고 청을 했더니 “그 보답으로 궁전 안마당에 도착하셨을 때 가장 먼저 마중 나오는 것이 무엇이든 저에게 주십시오.”라고 해 서약서까지 써주었다는 얘기와 아무래 잘못한 거 같아 마음이 불편하다는 얘기를 해주었어요.
하지만 그녀는 아빠를 진심으로 사랑했기에 “만약 한스가 온다면 기꺼이 따라 나서겠어요.”라고 말해주었지요.
한편 고슴도치 한스가 돼지를 잘 돌보다 보니 돼지들의 수가 기하급수적으로 늘어나 급기야는 온 숲에 돼지들이 가득 들어차게 되었답니다.
그리하여 더는 숲에서 살 수 없겠다 결심한 고슴도치 한스가 아빠에게 언제 갈 테니 마을에 있는 모든 돼지우리를 비워달라 전갈을 놓았지요. 왜냐면 엄청난 돼지 떼를 데리고 갈 거니 도축하고 싶은 사람들은 누구든 잡아도 좋다고 말했거든요.
이 전갈을 전해들은 아빠는 고민에 빠졌어요. 왜냐면 고슴도치 한스가 오래전에 죽은 줄로만 알았거든요.
여하튼 고슴도치 한스는 수탉에 올라타고 돼지 떼를 몰고 마을로 들어서 도축하기 시작하라 말했지요.
하! 어찌나 많은 돼지들을 잡았던지 돼지 멱(목) 따는 소리가 3킬로미터 밖까지 들렸다네요!
이후 고슴도치 한스가 말했어요.
“아빠, 대장간에 가셔서 한번만 더 제 수탉 발에 신발을 신겨주세요. 그럼 제가 타고 가 살아있는 동안은 절대 돌아오지 않을 게요.”
그리하여 아빠는 그 수탉에게 한 번 더 신발을 만들어주었지요. 고슴도치 한스가 다시 돌아오지 않겠다고 해서 너무 기뻤거든요.
고슴도치 한스가 첫 번째 왕국으로 수탉을 타고 갔어요.
거기엔 이미 왕이, 누구든 백파이프를 들고 수탉을 타고 오는 자가 있음 인정사정 볼 것 없이 총을 쏘고 베고 찔러 죽여 절대 궁에 들어오지 못하게 하라고 명령을 내려놓은 상태였어요.
그래서 고슴도치 한스가 거기 도착했을 땐, 모두가 창을 꼬나들고 우르르 달려들었어요. 
하지만 그는 수탉에게 박차(발질)를 가해 수탉이 성문을 뛰어넘어 날아올라 왕의 창 바로 앞에 내려앉게 했지요.
한스가 소리질렀어요.
“왕이시어, 약조한 것을 내어주지 않음, 제가 공주님의 생명을 앗아가겠습니다.”  
그래서 왕은 자기와 딸의 목숨을 살리기 위해 딸보고 그를 따라가라 간청하기 시작했어요.
그리하여 그녀가 새하얀 드레스를 입었지요. 그녀의 아빠는 그녀에게 말 여섯 필이 끄는 마차와 금과 재물들로 운반하는 화려한 수행원들을 딸려주었지요.
그녀가 마차에 올라타자, 수탉과 백파이프(피리)를 든 고슴도치 한스도 그녀 옆에 자리를 잡고 앉았어요.
그런 다음 그들은 작별인사를 하고 길을 떠났고, 왕은 다시는 딸애를 못 만날 거라 생각했지요.
하지만 그건 잘못된 생각이었어요.
왜냐면 일행이 도시에서 살짝 멀리 나오자, 고슴도치 한스가 공주의 옷을 벗기곤, 자신(고슴도치 한스)의 고슴도치 피부로 그녀가 피를 철철 흘릴 때까지 꿰뚫었기 때문이죠.
“배반한 것에 대한 응보요.”라며 그가 말했어요. “어서 가시오, 나는 당신을 데려가지 않을 테요!”
이렇게 그는 그녀를 다시 집으로 쫓아버렸고, 그녀는 불명예를 안고 남은 평생을 살아야했답니다.
한편 고슴도치 한스는 자신의 백파이프(피리)를 쥐고 수탉을 타고 더욱 멀리 나아가 두 번째 왕의 영토에 도착했어요. 그가 두 번째로 길을 알려주었던 왕이었죠.
하지만 여기선 왕이 누구든 고슴도치 한스와 비슷하게 생긴 사람이 오면 들이라 일러놓은 상태였지요.
경비병들이 ‘받들어 총 자세’(총을 앞으로 내밀며 하는 인사)를 하며 그를 안전하게 안내하더니 궁전 안으로 들여보내주었어요.
하지만 공주는 그를 보자마자 깜짝 놀라고 말았지요, 하긴 그럴 만도 하죠. 그가 워낙 낯선 겉모습을 하고 있었으니까요.
하지만 공주님은 곧 자신이 아빠와 한 약속이니 물릴 수 없다는 것을 기억해냈어요.
그래서 공주님은 고슴도치 한스를 환영하며 맞아주었어요.
곧 그는 그녀와 결혼했어요.
그는 공주와 함께 왕실 식탁으로 갔고, 그녀는 그의 옆에 앉아 함께 마시고 음식을 들었어요.
저녁이 되어 그들이 잠자리에 들 시간이 되자, 공주는 그의 가시들이 두려웠지요.
하지만 그는 공주에게 겁먹지 말라 말했어요, 왜냐면 그녀에겐 어떤 위험도 가해지지 않을 테니까요. 
그는 이미 나이 드신 왕에게 침실 문 앞에 경비병 네 명으로 보초를 서게 했고, 그가 방으로 들어가면 큰 불을 피우고 대기하고 있어라 말했지요, 또한 그가 잠자기 위해 자신의 고슴도치 피부에서 기어 나오고 그 고슴도치 피부를 침대 옆에 두면, 병사들이 민첩하게 그걸 가지고 나가 불 속에 던져 넣고 완전히 타버릴 때까지 지키게 해달라고 말씀드렸지요.
시계가 열한시를 가리키며 땡땡 치자, 그(고슴도치 한스)는 침실로 들어가 고슴도치 피부를 벗어서 침대 옆에 놓아두었어요.
그러자 병사들이 와서 민첩하게 그걸 들고 가 불 속에 던져 넣었지요.
불이 활활 타며 그걸 완전히 태워버렸어요. 
그는 이제 (마법에서) 풀려나 인간의 모습을 하고 침대에 누어있었어요. 다만 온 몸이 마치 무언가에 태워진 양 새까맣답니다.
왕이 용하다는 의사들을 보내 귀한 연고를 발라주자 그가 다시 새하얗게 변하며 어느 잘생긴 젊은이의 모습으로 돌아왔어요.
그 모습을 본 공주님은 아주 기뻤답니다. 
다음날 아침 그들은 기쁘게 기상을 해 마시고 먹었어요.
그런 다음 결혼식을 당당히 거행했지요.
또한 나이 드신 왕이 돌아가신 후에는 고슴도치 한스가 왕국을 물려받았답니다.
몇 년이 지난 다음 그는 아내를 데리고 아빠에게로 가 자신이 그의 아들이라고 말씀드렸지요.
하지만 아빠는 자신에겐 아들이 없다고 선언했지요. 예전에 한 명이 있긴 있었지만 가시들이 달린 고슴도치의 모습을 하고 태어나 세상으로 나가버렸다는 거예요.
그런 다음 한스가 자신이 그임을 납득시키자, 나이 든 아빠는 기뻐하며 아들 내외와 함께 아들의 왕국으로 갔답니다.
자, 제 이야기는 끝이 났네요, 그럼 이제 ‘구스트헨’(‘고슴도치 한스’ 또는 어떤 사람이름을 말하는 것 같음. 독일어→Gustchen. 영어번역→little August. 둘 다 사전에 없는 단어임)보다 먼저 그(=고슴도치 한스)의 집(=왕궁)에 도착해볼까요.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「고슴도치 한스」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「고슴도치 한스」  (영어) ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter108.html


다만 동화 맨 마지막 한 문장만은 아래의 독일어 원문을 참고해 해석했습니다.

「고슴도치 한스」  (독일어. 1857년) ▶ https://de.wikisource.org/wiki/Hans_mein_Igel_(1857) 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



109. 수의



옛날에 일곱 살 난 어린 아들을 둔 엄마가 한 분 계셨어요.
아들은 너무도 사랑스럽고 잘생겨서 한 번 보면 좋아하지 않는 사람이 없었을 정도였지요.
그런 아들이 엄마에겐 이 세상 가장 소중했어요.
그러다 문득 아이가 병에 걸려 하느님 곁으로 가고 말았어요.
이 때문에 엄마는 상심이 이만 저만이 아니었던지라 매일 밤낮을 울고 또 울었답니다.
하지만 그 후 얼마 되지 않아, 땅에 묻힌 아이가 밤에, 살아생전 자신이 늘 앉아서 놀던 장소에 나타나더니, 엄마가 우니까 자신도 따라 울더니 아침이 되자 사라졌어요.
하지만 그런 일이 있고도 엄마의 눈물은 그칠 새가 없었고, 그러던 어느 날 밤, 아기가 관에 눕혀질 때 입었던 새하얀 작은 수의와 머리에 꽃 화환을 두르고서, 엄마 침대 발 부분에 서서는 말했어요.
“오오, 엄마, 눈물을 멈추세요, 안 그럼 제가 관에서 잠이 들 수가 없어요, 엄마가 흘리시는 그 눈물들 때문에 제 수의가 마를 날이 없을 거니 때문이에요.”  
그 말을 들은 엄마가 걱정이 돼 더는 울지 않았답니다.
다음날 밤에 그 아이가 손에 작은 촛불을 꼭 쥐고서 다시 나타나 말했어요.
“보세요, 엄마, 제 수의가 거의 다 말라가요. 저도 이제 지하에서 편히 쉴 수 있어요.”
그래서 엄마는 자신의 깊은 슬픔을 하느님께 맡기고 차분히 인내하며 하루하루를 견디었지요.
그 후 아이는 다시 나타나지 않았고, 땅 속 자신의 침대에서 영원히 잠들 수 있었답니다.

(슬픈 내용이네요. ○음이란 단어는 언제나 슬픔... 다신 못 만나니까 -_-)
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「수의」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「수의」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter109.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



110. 가시덤불 속의 유대인



옛날에 하인 한 명을 둔 부자가 살고 있었어요.
그 하인은 근면하고 정직하게 봉사했지요.
하인은 매일 아침 가장 먼저 침대에서 일어나 매일 밤 가장 늦게 잠자리에 들었어요. 어려운 일, 남들이 하기 싫어하는 일은 다 도맡아 했지요. 시키지 않아도 먼저 나서서 하는 건 항상 그의 장점이었답니다.
게다가 하인은 절대 불평 한 마디 하지 않고서, 모든 걸 만족해하며 명랑하게 임했더랬죠.
근무 1년이 끝났을 때, 주인은 그에게 보수를 주지 않았어요. 
주인이 속으로 말했지요.
‘이게 가장 영리한 방법이지. 왜냐면 난 돈을 절약하고, 하인은 떠나지 않고 말없이 일을 계속해줄 테니까 말이야.’
역시나 하인도 한 마디 대꾸하지 않고, 첫해와 마찬가지로 두 번째 해에도 일을 하였더랬죠.
그 2년째도 끝이 났을 때, 이번에도 역시 주인은 땡 전 한 푼 주지 않았어요. 그래도 하인은 속으로 만족해하며 계속 머물렀답니다
3년째 해도 또한 지나자, 주인은 무슨 생각을 하는 척 자신의 호주머니에 손을 푹 집어넣더니 역시나 빈손을 턱하니 내밀었어요.
그러자 마침내 하인도 한 마디 했어요.
“주인님, 3년을 꼬박 당신을 위해 정직하게 일했는데, 제가 응당 받아야 될 돈을 주셔야하지 않겠어요. 그래야 저도 여길 떠나 세상을 좀 더 돌아다녀볼 수 있을게 아니에요.”
“그 참 녀석하곤,”라며 늙은 구두쇠가 짐짓 생색이란 생색은 다 내면 서 대답했어요. “네가 부지런히도 일해준 것도 있고 하여 내 보수를 두둑이 주도록 하마.”
주인이 자신의 호주머니게 손을 집어넣더니 꼴랑 5백 원(원문→1/4페니)짜리 동전 세 개를 하나하나 세서 내주며 말했어요.
“옛다, 내 1년 치 보수를 5백 원씩 해서 총 세 개를 주마. 이건 정말 나니까 주는 거금이다. 후한 보수라고. 세상에 이렇게 후하게 주는 주인은 나밖에 없을 게다.”
돈 개념이 없던 정직한 하인은 감사히 돈을 받아 호주머니에 챙기며 생각했지요.
“앗싸! 이제 내 지갑도 두둑해졌는데, 더는 힘든 일을 하며 고생할 필요가 뭐 있겠어!”
그렇게 하여 하인은 길을 떠나, 언덕이 나오면 오르고 골짜기가 나오면 내려가고, 시종일관 기쁨의 노래를 부르며 껑충껑충 뛰었답니다.
그가 막 수풀 옆을 지나가려는데, 작은 사람(난쟁이) 한 명이 불쑥 튀어나오며 이렇게 외치는 거예요.
“세상 번뇌에 해탈한 거 같은 명랑한 친구, 어디가?”
“슬플 이유도 없지요?”라며 하인이 대답했어요. “까짓것 받았거든요. 3년 치 보수로 이 호주머니가 다 짤랑짤랑 거리게요.”
“대체 얼마씩이나 받았기에?”라며 난쟁이가 그에게 물었어요.
“얼마냐고요? 5백 원짜리 동전 총 세 개요.”
“여보게,”라며 난쟁이가 말했어요. “난 가난하고 어려운 난쟁이야, 그니까 내게 그 동전 3개를 주게나. 나야 더는 일을 할 수 없지만, 자넨 아직 젊으니 앞으로도 쉽게 밥벌이 정도는 할 수 있을 게 아닌가.”
하인은 원체 착한 마음씨를 지녔기에 이 늙은 난쟁이에게 동정심을 느끼곤 가지고 있던 5백 원짜리 동전 세 개를 주며 말했답니다.
“주님의 이름으로 가지세요, 전 뭐 그거 없어도 아무렇지도 않으니까요.”
그런 다음 난쟁이가 말했어요.
“자네 심성이 착한 걸 봤으니 내 그 덕분에 자네에게 세 가지 소원을 약속하겠네. 동전 하나씩마다 모두 세 개의 소원이 이루어질 걸세.”
“아하?”라며 하인이 말했어요. “요술도 하실 수 있는 분이셨군요! 그럼, 어, 그렇다면요, 우선, 저 뭐든 조준하는 대로 다 맞출 수 있는 총 한 자루만 주세요. 그리고 두 번째로는요, 제가 연주만 하면 그 소리를 듣는 사람은 무조건 춤을 춰야하는 바이올린 한 대만 주세요, 그리고 세 번째로는요, 제 부탁을 들은 사람은 누구든 그걸 거절하지 못하는 소원이 이루어졌으면 좋겠어요.”
“다 이루어질 걸세,”라며 그 난쟁이가 말했어요. 그러다니 뭔 생각이 났는지 바로 옆에 있던 수풀에 손을 쑥 집어넣더니 마치 오래전부터 거기 있었다는 듯 총 한 자루와 바이올린 한 대를 썩 꺼냈답니다.
난쟁이는 그 총을 하인에게 건네며 말했어요.
“이제 언제라도 남에게 부탁을 해보게, 그럼 이 세상 누구도 자네의 청을 거절하지 못할 걸세.”
“어렵소! 아예 하나 더 비는 건데?”라며 하인은 혼잣말을 하고는 어쨌든 명랑해져서는 앞으로 걸어나갔답니다.
곧이어 하인은 기다란 염소 수염을 한 유대인을 한 명과 마주쳤어요. 그 유대인은 나무 꼭대기에 앉아 노래를 부르고 있던 새의 노랫소리를 감상하고 있었죠.
“원 세상에나,”라며 유대인이 감탄하며 말했어요. “정말 소름 끼칠 정도로 노래를 잘하는 새로구먼! 저게 내 새였다면! 꼬리에 소금을 뿌려 한 입에 꿀꺽했을 텐데!”
“원하는 게 그거라면야,”라며 하인이 말했어요. “새를 여기 아래로 떨어뜨려드리리다.”
그가 조준 후 방아쇠를 당기다마자 새가 가시덤불 속으로 털썩하고 떨어졌어요.
“어때요, 됐죠, 악한(나쁜 사람) 씨,”라며 그가 유대인보고 말했어요. “새를 줍는 건 직접 하시구려!”
“오!”라며 유대인이 말했어요. “악한이란 말은 빼주시구려, 선생, 하지만 줍는 건 내 금방 하리다. 당신이 제대로 맞춘 게 맞다는 그 놈은 금방 내 손에 잡히리다.”
그런 다음 그가 바닥에 엎드리더니 수풀 속으로 기어들어가기 시작했어요.
유대인이 가시덤불 속으로 들어가자, 착한 하인이 장난 끼가 발동해 자신의 바이올린을 꺼내 연주하기 시작했지요.
그 즉시 유대인의 다리가 움직이기 시작하더니 껑충껑충 공중으로 뛰어오르지 않겠어요, 하인이 바이올린을 연주하면 할수록 유대인의 춤은 더 황홀해져갔어요.
하지만 가시덤불들이 유대인의 누더기 외투를 다 찢어놓기 시작했답니다. 급기야 유대인의 수염도 빗질되다 떨어져나갔죠. 유대인은 온 몸이 찔리고 뜯겨나가고 야단도 아니었어요.
“오 제발,”라며 유대인이 말했어요. “원하시는 게 뭐요? 제발 그 바이올린을 놔두시오, 선생. 제발 나 춤 좀 그만 줍시다 그려.”
하지만 하인은 그의 말에 귀 기울지 않고 생각했지요.
‘그동안 사람들의 고혈(비싼 이자를 받고 돈놀이를 한 거)을 잘 도 짜왔겠다, 이제 이 가시덤불들이 네게 똑같이 하는 거다.’
하인은 재차 더 세게 연주를 시작했어요.
그 바람에 유대인이 전보다 더 높이 뛰어올랐고 외투는 이제 찢겨져나가 가시덤불에 걸린 채 남아있었지요.
“아이고, 나 죽네!”라며 유대인이 소리쳤어요. “신사양반 뭐든 달라는 건 다 줄 테니 제발 그 바이올린 연주 좀 그쳐주시오, 내 금화가 두둑이 든 지갑을 주리다.”
“당신이 그리 관대하다면야,”라며 하인이 말했어요. “나도 연주를 멈추지요. 하지만 말에 책임을 지셔야해요. 안 그랬다간 더 심하게 춤을 출 주 아세요.”
그리하여 지갑을 받아 챙긴 하인은 유유히 제 갈 길을 갔답니다.
멍하니 서서 한참 동안이나 하인의 뒤를 바라보고 있던 유대인은, 하인이 저 멀리로 완전히 모습이 사라지자, 그제야 고래고래 고함을 질러대며 말했어요.
“아이고 저 망할 놈의 연주가를 봤나, 완전 술집 불한당 아냐! 제 기필코 네 놈을 잡고 말테다. 구두 밑창이 닳을 때까지 뒤 쫓아갈 테다! 이 생양아치 같은 자식아! 네 놈 주둥이(입)에 동전을 잔뜩 집어넣고 묵사발로 만들고 말테다!”
유대인은 자신이 힘이 닿는 데까지 주저리주저리 하인을 욕하고 또 욕했어요.
그러고 나니 좀 기운이 난 그가 숨을 가다듬고는 도시로 달려가 판사님에게 갔죠.
“판사님요,”라며 유대인이 말했어요. “고소할 게 있습니다요. 제가 오늘 공개된 도로가에서 어느 불한당 같은 놈에게 강도를 당하고 몹쓸 짓을 당했지 뭡니까요! 그 모습을 보았다면 냉철한 돌멩이조차도 제게 동정심을 느꼈을 정도입니다. 제 옷들은 죄다 찢겨져 나갔고, 제 몸엔 찔리고 긁히지 않는 곳이 없을 지경입니다. 게다가 그 자는 금화가 든 제 지갑까지 탈탈 털어가 버렸습니다. 부디 그 자를 당장 감옥에 처넣어주십시오!”
“병사던가?”라며 판사가 말했어요. “병사가 자네를 기병도(칼)로 찔렀다는 겐가?”
“아뇨 아뇨 그게 아니라요!”라며 유대인이 말했어요. “그 자는 검을 가지고 있지 않았습니다. 검이 아니라 총을 한 자루 등에 메고 있었죠. 목에는 바이올린을 매었고요. 그러니 그 놈을 찾긴 쉬울 겁니다요.”
그래서 판사는 사람들을 보내 그 자를 찾게 했지요.
사람들이 착한 하인을 발견했어요. 그가 원체 천천히 길을 가고 있다 보니 멀리 못가서 잡혔죠. 게다가 그와 함께 그 문제의 지갑도 확보가 되었답니다.
하인은 사람들에 의해 판사 앞에 잡혀 오자마자 이렇게 말했어요.
“저는 그 유대인에겐 손끝하나 까딱도 하지 않은 걸요, 그 돈도 제가 뺏은 것이 아니라, 그가 자신의 자유 의지로 제게 건네준 거예요. 제 연주소리를 견딜 수 없다면서, 제가 바이올린 연주를 멈추는 대가로요.”
“저런 허무맹랑한 소리를 하는!”라며 그 유대인이 소리쳤어요. “자의 저 뻔뻔스런 낯짝 좀 보소.”
하인이 한 소리가 역시나 믿기지 않았던 판사가 말했어요.
“그건 자기 방어의 소리로 그럴듯하지 않네. 세상에 어느 유대인이 돈을 선 듯 준다는 겐다, 그것도 공짜로.”
그리하여 판사는 공공 도로에서 강도질을 한 죄를 물어 착한 하인에게 교수형(목을 매닮)을 선고(널리 알림)했어요.
하인이 끌려가는 동안, 그 유대인은 그래도 화가 풀리지 않는지 하인의 뒷모습을 향해 소리를 내질렀어요.
“이 깡패야! 이 개만도 못한 바이올린 연주자야! 이제야 응당한 대가를 받게 되는 구나!”
하인은 교수형 집행인과 함께 말없이 걸어가 사다리를 타고 올라갔어요. 그러다가 마지막 발판을 남겨두고 뒤로 돌아보며 판사에게 말했어요.
“부디 죽기 전에 한 가지 소원이 있습니다요, 나리.”
“그래, 살려달란 소리만 아니면.”라며 판사가 말했어요. 
“살려달란 소린 아닙니다요,”라며 하인이 대답했어요. “다만 마지막 호의를 베푸시어 제가 부디 제 바이올린을 한 번만 더 연주할 수 있게 허락해주십시오.”
그러자 유대인이 “꽥!”하고 한마디 비명을 내지르며 말했어요. 
“이 살인자! 살인자야! 절대 저 자의 말을 들어줘선 안 됩니다! 절대로요!”
하지만 판사는 말했어요.
“내가 이 간단한 부탁 하나 들어줄 수 없다는 겐가? 내 보장하지, 그는 연주해도 되네.” 
하지만 실은, 난쟁이가 하인에게 준 선물 덕분에, 하인의 청을 판사가 거절할 수 없었던 거랍니다.
그러자 유대인이 소리쳤어요.
“오! 아이고 이런! 나를 묶어줘, 나를 단단히 묶어달라고!”
그러는 사이 착한 심성의 하인은 자신의 목에서 바이올린을 풀어 연주준비를 했더랬죠.
그가 바이올린 줄을 처음으로 문질러 소리를 내자, 거기 있던 모두가 전율을 느끼며 부들거렸어요, 판사도, 서기도, 교수형 집행인과 부하도요, 그리고 유대인을 막 묶어주려던 사람의 손에서 끈이 스스로 미끄러지고 말았죠.
두 번째로 줄을 문질러 소리를 내자, 모두가 자신들의 다리 한 짝을 치켜들었어요, 교수형 집행인조차 손에서 착한 하인을 놓아주고 혼자 본격적으로 춤을 출 준비를 했죠.
세 번째로 줄을 문질러 소리를 내자, 모두가 팔짝 뛰어오르더니 춤을 추기 시작했어요.
판사도 유대인도 까짓것 점프들을 해대고 있었어요.
곧 호기심에서 시장판에 모여 있던 모든 구경꾼들조차도 서로 춤을 추기 시작했지요. 남녀노소, 뚱땡이도 홀쭉이도, 서로서로 어울려 춤을 추었답니다.
멍멍이들도 또한 자신들의 뒷다리들을 까짓것 치켜들며 깡충깡충 사방으로 뛰어다니고 있었어요.
하인이 연주를 오래하면 할수록 춤꾼들은 더 높이 높이 뛰어올랐어요, 그 바람에 서로의 머리들이 부딪혀 여기저기서 아프다는 비명소리가 터져나오기 시작했어요.
마침내 판사가 숨까지 헐떡이며 소리쳤어요.
“바이올린 연주를 멈춰주면 자네를 살려주겠네.”
그런 까닭에 동정심이 생긴 착한 하인이 바이올린 연주를 멈추고 바이올린을 목에 다시 둘러매곤 사다리를 타고 내려왔어요.
그런 다음 하인은 간신히 숨이 붙어 헐떡이며 바닥에 드러누운 그 유대인에게로 가 말했지요.
“이 악당아, 순순히 자백해 이제, 네가 돈을 준 거잖아, 안 그럼 바이올린 다시 연주해서 또 춤추게 할 거라고.”
“내가 그 지갑을 훔쳤소, 내가 훔친 거요!”라며 유대인이 외쳤어요. “하지만 그걸 당신이 정직하게 얻은 건 맞소.”
그래서 판사는 도둑질한 죄를 물어 그 유대인을 교수대로 끌고 가 사형을 시키게 했답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「가시덤불 속의 유대인」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「가시덤불 속의 유대인」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter110.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



111. 솜씨 좋은 사냥꾼



옛날에 자물쇠 제조공 기술을 배운 한 젊은 친구가 있었습니다.
그가 아빠에게 “세상에 나가 출세할 방법을 찾아보고 싶어요.”라고 말했어요.
“그러려무나,”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “나도 마음에 드는 제안이다.”
그러면서 아빠는 그에게 여행경비로 얼마간의 돈을 주었어요.
그리하여 그는 세상을 여행한 다음 일자리를 하나 찾았지요.
한참 후 그는 더는 자물쇠 제조공 일을 하고 싶지 않다는 결심을 하게 되었어요, 더는 그 일이 좋아지지 않아서예요. 그래서 그는 사냥꾼이 되는 상상에 취했어요.  
그러던 한번은 산책을 하다 초록색 옷을 입은 사냥꾼과 마주치게 되었지요.
사냥꾼이 그에게 말했어요.
“어디서 왔고 어디를 가려던 게요?”
젊은이가 말했어요.
“저는 자물쇠 수습공입니다. 그런데 더는 이 일이 좋아지지 않아서, 사냥 기술을 배워볼까 하는데 가르쳐주실 의향이 있으신지요?”
“오, 그 좋지.”라며 사냥꾼이 말했어요. “그럼 나를 따라 오게.”
그리하여 젊은 친구는 그를 따라가 수년을 그의 밑에서 봉사하며 사냥 기술을 배웠어요.
이후 그는 다른 곳에서 자신의 운을 시험해보고 싶단 생각을 했지요.
그리고 사냥꾼은 그동안의 보수로 딸랑 공기총(공기의 힘으로 탄알을 발사시킴) 한 자루만 주었지요. 하지만 그 총은 백발백중인 총이었지요.
그런 다음 그는 출발했는데 아주 울창한 숲에 들어서게 되었어요. 어찌나 울창한 숲인지 가도 가도 끝이 보이지 않았어요.
밤이 되자 그는 들짐승들을 피할 목적으로 높은 나무속에 앉았어요.
밤12시쯤 되자 저 멀리서 가물거리는 작은 빛줄기 하나가 보이는 듯 했어요.
나뭇가지들 사이로 내려다보던 그가 그리로 가봐야겠단 생각이 들었어요.
하지만 우선은 모자를 벗어 그 불빛 방향으로 내던졌지요. 내려왔을 때 그 모자로 방향을 알기 위해서였지요.
그는 내려온 다음 모자 쪽으로 가 다시 쓴 다음 쭉 나아갔어요.
좀 가니 불빛이 좀 더 뚜렷해졌어요, 그가 거의 가까이 가자 그건 거대한 모닥불이었어요. 즉 세 거인이 그 옆에 앉아 쇠꼬챙이에 수소 한 마리를 꽂고 굽고 있는 중이었지요.
곧 그들 중 한 명이 말했어요.
“곧 익을 거 같은데 맛이나 먼저 봐야겠다.”
그러면서 고기 한 점을 뚝 떼어선 막 입에 갖다대려했어요. 그때 사냥꾼이 손에 들고 있던 총을 한 방 “빵!”하고 쏘았지요.
“어렵소. 이거 봐라,”라며 거인이 말했어요. “강풍이 불더니 내 손에 있던 고기가 날아갔네!”
그가 고기 또 한 점을 떼었어요.
하지만 막 입에 대려는 순간 또 사냥꾼이 총을 쏘아 날려버렸죠.
그러자 거인이 옆에 앉아 있던 다른 거인의 귀방망이를 한 대 갈리며 불끈 소리쳤어요.
“왜 내 고기를 낚아채고 그래?”
“내가 안 했는데,”라며 상대방이 말했어요. “사격의 명수가 네 고기를 쏘아 날려보낸 게 분명해.”
거인이 고기 또 한 점을 떼어냈어요, 하지만 또 금방 손에서 날아가버렸죠, 고기가요. 왜냐면 사냥꾼이 이번에도 그걸 명중시켰거든요.
그러자 그 거인이 말했어요.
“입에 대려던 고기를 명중시켜 날려 보낼 정도로 사격의 명수라면 우리에게도 도움이 될 거다.”
그래서 그가 큰 소리로 소리쳤어요.
“어이 거기, 너 사격의 명수 듣거라, 이리 나와 우리 옆에 앉아 배를 채워라, 널 해치지 않으마. 하지만 나오지 않음 우리가 힘으로 네 놈을 끌어낼 테다, 그럼 넌 목숨을 잃게 돼!”
이리 되자 젊은이는 그들 쪽으로 걸어 나오며 자신이 백번 쏘면 백번 다 맞추는 솜씨 좋은 사냥꾼이라 소개했어요. 
그러자 거인들이 “그럼 우리랑 함께 가자, 네가 잘 할 수 있는 일이 있거든. 숲 외곽에 큰 호수가 하나 있는데, 그 뒤에 탑이 하나 서 있어, 그 탑 안에 사랑스런 공주가 갇혀(묶고) 있지. 우린 그녀를 무척이나 채어오려던(낚아채오려던) 참이야.”라고 말했어요.
“좋아,”라며 그가 말했어요. “너희들을 위해 그녀를 곧 데려오지.”
그런 다음 거인들이 덧붙였어요.
“하지만 또 하나가 있단 말이지, 자그마한 강아지가 한 마리 있는데 누구든 다가가기만 짖기 시작해 그럼 궁전에 있는 모든 이들이 잠에서 깨어나, 그래서 우린 매번 성공하지 못했어요. 네가 그 강아질 쏘아 죽일 수 있겠지?”
“그럼,”라며 그가 말했어요. “그렇게 작은 것은 내 총 한 방이면 될 거야.”
그 후 그는 보트를 타고 노를 저어 호수를 건넜어요.
땅을 밟자마자 정말 작은 강아지 한 마리가 달려 나오더니 막 짖으려고 했어요, 그래서 사냥꾼이 자신의 공기총을 꺼내 강아지를 쏘아 죽였지요.
그것을 본 거인들은 기뻐서 생각했어요.
‘이제 공주를 거의 다 데려온 거나 마찬가지다.’
하지만 사냥꾼은 우선 안에 무엇이 있는지 살펴보고 싶어, 거인들에게 “내가 부를 때까지 밖에 그대로 있어.”라고 말했어요.
그런 다음 그는 성으로 들어갔지요, 정말 모두가 잠들어 있어 쥐죽은 듯 고요한 성이였지요.
그가 첫 번째 방문을 열자, 순은으로 만들어진 검이 한 자루 벽에 걸려 있었어요, 그 검 위엔 왕의 이름과 황금별 하나가 그려져 있었어요. 그리고 그 검 근처엔 봉인된 편지 한 통이 뜯어진 채 열려 있었는데 “누구든 이 검을 차지하는 자는 자신에 반하는 모든 걸 죽일 수 있느리라.”라고 적혀 있었어요.
그래서 그가 벽에서 그 검을 끄집어 내 허리춤에 차고 계속 앞으로 나아갔어요.
그런 다음 그가 방에 들어서자 공주님이 누워서 자고 계셨어요, 그녀가 어찌나 아름다운지 그는 그만 숨을 꾹 참으며 넋 놓고 서서 그녀를 바라보았답니다.
그가 속으로 생각했어요.
‘이 순백의 아가씨를 사악한 의도를 가진 무자비한 거인들에게 어찌 넘겨줄 수 있겠어?’ 
그가 주변을 좀 더 돌아보니 침대 밑에 슬리퍼 한 켤레가 있는데, 오른쪽 슬리퍼엔 별과 함께 공주 아빠의 이름이 적혀 있고, 왼쪽 슬리퍼엔 별과 함께 공주 자신의 이름이 적혀 있었어요.
또한 그녀는 커다란 비단 목수건도 하나 하고 있었는데, 거기엔 금실로 수를 놓아, 오른쪽 편에는 공주 아빠의 이름이 적혀 있고, 그녀 왼쪽 편에는 그녀 자신의 이름이 적혀 있었어요.
사냥꾼은 가위를 집어 오른쪽 것(비단 목수건)을 잘라 자신의 배낭에 집어넣고, 왕의 이름이 적힌 오른쪽 슬리퍼도 또한 집어 배낭에 담았어요.
그때까지도 아가씨는 여전히 누워서 자고 있었죠. 
그녀는 잠옷을 입고 있었는데, 그는 그 잠옷의 끝자락도 또한 잘라 배낭에 넣었답니다. 이 모든 일을 하면서 그는 그녀에겐 손도 대지 않았죠.
그런 다음 잠들어 있는 그녀를 깨우지 않고 나와 성문으로 다시 나왔어요.
거인들은 여전히 밖에서 그를 기다리고 있었지요. 그가 공주를 업고 오리라 기대했던 거지요.
하지만 그는 거인들보고 이제 들어와도 된다고 소리쳤어요. 아가씨는 이미 수중에 있다면서요. 다만 성문을 열어줄 순 없는데, 대신 기어들어올 수 있는 구멍이 하나 있으니 괜찮을 거라 그랬죠.
그래서 거인들은 그 구멍으로 기어들어와 했어요.
첫 번째 거인이 기어들어오자, 사냥꾼은 손으로 거인의 머리채를 낚아채 단칼에 베어버리곤 나머지 몸통도 안으로 끌어당겼어요. 
그는 두 번째 거인도 불러 마찬가지로 머리를 베었고, 세 번째 거인도 똑같은 방법으로 목을 베었어요.
그는 적들로부터 아름다운 아가씨를 보호한 게 무척 기뻤어요, 그래서 거인들의 혀를 잘라 자신의 배낭에 담았지요.
그런 다음 그가 생각했어요.
‘이제 집에 가서 아빠를 뵙고 내가 어떻게 해쳐왔는지 말씀드려야지, 그런 다음 계속 세상을 여행할 거야. 하느님께서 보호해주시니 행운을 금방 찾을 거야.’
하지만 성에 있던 왕이 깨었을 때, 세 거인이 죽은 채 누워 있는 걸 봤어요.
그래서 왕이 공주의 침실로 가 그녀를 깨우곤 “누가 거인들을 죽였더냐?”라고 물었지요.
그러자 그녀가 말했어요.
“사랑하는 아빠, 저는 몰라요, 전 잠들어 있었던 걸요.”
하지만 그녀가 일어나 슬리퍼를 신으려고 보니 오른쪽 슬리퍼가 안 보이는 거예요, 그리고 목수건도 잘라져 있는데 오른쪽 끝자락만 잘린 채였죠. 그리고 자신의 잠옷도 끝부분이 조금 잘려져 나간 상태였어요.
왕이 모든 신하들과 병사들과 성안의 모두를 한데 모이게 해 “누가 내 딸을 구해주고 거인들을 베었느냐?”라고 물었어요.
그때 때마침 한(어느) 대위 한 명이 “제가 그랬습니다.”라며 나섰지요. 그는 눈이 하나밖에 없어 섬뜩한 얼굴의 사내였지요.
그러자 나이 든 왕이 “자네가 그랬다면, 내 자네와 내 딸을 결혼시켜주겠네.”라고 말했어요.
하지만 아가씨는 말했어요.
“사랑하는 아빠, 그와 결혼할 바에야, 차라리 제 두 다리가 걸을 수 있는 데까지 멀리 세상으로 도망칠 테에요.”
하지만 왕은,
“네가 그와 결혼하지 않겠다면 그 왕족 옷을 벗고 농부의 옷을 입고 당장 나가거라, 넌 이 길로 옹기장이(그릇을 만드는 사람)한테 가 흙 그릇 장사 시작해야한다.”
그래서 그녀는 왕실 옷을 벗고 옹기장이한테 가 “내다 팔 거니 그릇들을 빌려주세요. 저녁까지 다 팔면 돈을 갚아드릴게요.”라고 말했어요.
그러자 왕은 그녀보고 “네가 직접 시장 한 구석에서 내다 팔거라.”라고 명령을 내렸어요. 왕은 또한 몇몇 농부들에게도 따로 지시를 내려 “짐마차(바퀴 2개)들을 끌고 가서 그릇을 몽땅 다 깨버리거라.”라고 말했어요.
그리하여 공주님이 시장 가판대에 그릇을 진열해놓았더니 정말로 짐마차들이 와 그녀의 그릇들을 몽땅 다 깨부셨어요.
그녀가 울기 시작하며 말했지요.
“아아, 이 그릇 값들을 이제 어찌 다 갚는다지?”
왕은 이를 통해 이제 공주가 대위와 결혼하리라 기대를 했지요.
하지만 그녀는 그 대신 다시 옹기장이한테로 가 “한 번만 더 그릇들을 빌려주세요.”라고 말했지요.
그가 말했어요.
“아니오. 먼저 빌려간 것들의 돈을 지불하셔야합니다.”
그러자 그녀가 아빠한테 가 울며 하소연을 하며 “이럴 거면 차라리 세상으로 나가겠어요.”라고 말했지요.
그때 왕이 말했어요.
“마라, 내 너를 위해 숲 외곽 쪽에 작은 오막살이집을 한 채 지어줄 테니, 넌 평생을 거기 머물며 모든 사람들을 위해 음식을 만들거라, 대신 누구에게서도 돈을 받아선 안 된다.”
오막살이집이 준비되자, 문에 간판이 하나 내걸렸는데 이렇게 적혀 있었어요.
“오늘만 공짜, 내일부턴 돈 받아요.”
그녀는 거기서 오랫동안 머물렸지요, 그래서 세상엔 어느 처녀가 간판 하나를 내걸고서 돈도 받지 않고 사람들에게 음식을 제공하더라는 루머가 돌았답니다.
사냥꾼도 이 얘기를 들었지요, 그가 혼자 생각했어요.
“그 참 내게 안성맞춤이네. 난 가난한데 돈도 한 푼 없으니까.”
그래서 그는 자신의 공기총과 배낭을 메고 길을 나섰지요. 배낭 안에는 자신이 예전에 한 행적들에 대한 증표(증거)로 성에서 가지고 왔던 것들을 다 담았답니다.
그가 숲에 들어서니 간판을 단 그 오막살이집이 정말 있었어요.
“오늘만 공짜, 내일부턴 돈 받아요.”
그는 예전에 세 거인들의 머리를 베었던 그 검을 허리에 차고 그 오막살이집으로 들어가 먹을 만한 게 있음 뭐든 달라고 주문했어요.
그는 금방 그 아리따운 아가씨에게 반해버렸어요. 그녀가 정말이지 그 어느 그림보다 사랑스러울 수 없었죠.
그녀가 “어디서 왔고 어디를 가시는 길이시죠?”라며 그에게 물었어요.
그가 말했지요.
“난 세상을 이리저리 떠돌고 있소이다.”
그러자 그녀가 “그 검은 어디서 난 거세요?”라고 그에게 물었어요. 왜냐면 그 검에 그녀 아빠(왕)의 진짜 이름이 적혀 있었거든요.
그는 “혹시 공주님이신가요?”라고 그녀에게 물었어요.
“네.”라며 그녀가 말했어요.
“이 검으로,”라며 그가 말했어요. “세 거인의 머리를 베었죠.”
그러면서 그가 그 증거로 자신의 배낭에서 거인들의 혀들을 꺼냈어요.
그런 다음 그는 또한 슬리퍼와, 목수건의 끝부분과, 잠옷의 한 조각도 보여주었어요.
이 결과 그녀는 무척이나 기뻐 “저를 구해주신 분이 바로 당신이군요.”라고 말했어요.
그날 바로 그들은 함께 나이 드신 왕께 가 왕을 오막살이집으로 데려왔어요.
공주는 아빠를 자신의 방으로 안내해 이 사냥꾼이 진정 거인들로부터 자신을 구한 바로 그 이라고 말씀드렸지요.
모든 증거물들을 본 나이 든 왕도 더는 의심을 할 수 없었지요.
모든 일을 어찌하여 벌어지게 된 건지를 알게 된 왕은 무척이나 기뻐 “자네갸 내 딸을 아내로 맞이하게나.”라고 말했지요. 
공주도 이 말이 무척이나 반가웠어요.
그리하여 공주는 그 사냥꾼을 마치 외국의 군주인양 옷을 입혔어요.
왕도 만찬을 준비시켰지요.
모두가 식탁에 모였을 때, 그때 그 대위는 공주 왼쪽 편에 앉고, 사냥꾼은 오른쪽 편에 앉게 되었는데, 대위는 그 사냥꾼이 손님으로 방금 도착한 외국의 군주인 줄로만 알았지요.
그들이 모두 먹고 마셨을 때, 나이 든 왕이 대위에게 “내 수수께끼를 하나 내볼 테니 알아 맞추어보시게.”라고 말했어요.
“가령 누군가가 ‘세 거인을 죽였다면 그들의 혀는 다 어디 간 것이냐?’고 말한다면, 그리고 ‘아무리 찾아봐도 혀는 못 찾겠더라고’ 내가 말한다면 이게 대체 어찌된 일일 텐가?”
대위가 말했어요.
“거인들에겐 원래 혀가 없습니다.”
“그렇진 않지,”라며 왕이 말했어요. “모든 동물들에겐 혀가 있지 않느냐.”
그런 다음 왕은 “그럼 그런 답을 한 그 누군가를 어찌 처리하면 좋겠는가?”라고 물었지요.
대위가 대답했어요.
“갈가리 찢어 죽이심이 마땅합니다.”
그러자 왕이 “그가 자신의 판결을 내렸노라.”라고 말했어요.
그 길로 대위는 감옥에 가둬지고 갈가리 찢겨졌답니다.
하지만 공주님은 사냥꾼과 행복한 결혼식을 올렸더랬죠.
그 후 그는 자신의 친아빠와 친엄마도 데리고 왔어요, 부모님은 자신들의 아들 때문에 행복하게 남은 생을 사실 수 있었지요.
그리고 나이 드신 왕이 돌아가신 후에는 그(사냥꾼)가 왕국을 물려받았답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「솜씨 좋은 사냥꾼」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「솜씨 좋은 사냥꾼」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter111.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



112. 하늘나라에서 가져온 도리깨



시골뜨기가 한번은 황소 두 마리를 끌고 밭을 갈아 젖히려고 막 밖으로 나왔어요.
그가 밭에 도착했을 때, 두 동물의 뿔이 자라기 시작하더니 점점 계속 자라고 자라, 그가 집으로 돌아가려고 했을 때에는 그 뿔들이 너무 커서 황소들이 성문을 통과할 수 없을 정도였어요.
이때 운이 좋게도 정육점 주인이 그 옆을 지나갔어요.
그래서 시골뜨기는 그에게 황소들을 넘기기로 했어요. 그리고 그 참에 얘기가 더 오고 가다, 시골뜨기가 ‘순무’(먹는 무의 일종. 사진링크▶ https://goo.gl/VPOB5B ) 씨앗을 한 보따리 가져다주면, 정육점 주인이 씨앗 하나당 은화 한 개로 계산해 값을 쳐주기로 했답니다. 시골뜨기에겐 정말 수지맞는 장소였죠!
그래서 농부가 집으로 가 순무 씨앗을 한 묶음 등에 짊어지고 출발했어요.
하지만 가는 도중 그만 보따리에서 씨앗 하나가 떨어지고 말았죠.
정육점 주인은 약속한 대로 가격을 쳐주었어요. 하지만 만약 농부가 그 씨앗 하나를 잃어버리지 않았다면 은화를 하나 더 받았을 텐데 말이죠.
한편 농부가 돌아갈 때보니, 떨어뜨리고 간 그 순무 씨앗이 어느 새 나무로 자라 하늘까지 닿아있었어요.
그러자 농부가 생각했어요.
“좋은 기회인데, 천사님들은 저 위에서 어떻게 생활하시는지 한 번 보고 와야겠다. 얘기 듣는 거랑 직접 두 눈으로 보는 거랑은 다르니까 말이야.”
그래서 그가 올라가보니, 천사님들이 하늘나라에서 한 참 ‘귀리’(벼와 비슷하게 생김. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/MmMQSJ )를 ‘도리깨질’(이삭에 달린 열매를 때려서 낟알을 얻는 것)을 하고 계셨어요. 그래서 한 참 정신없이 구경하고 있었더랬죠.
그가 그렇게 천사님들을 구경하고 있는데 어째 그가 서 있던 나무가 기우뚱거리기 시작하는 거예요.
그래서 그가 아래를 흘낏 내려다보니 어떤 사람이 막 나무를 베어 넘기려고 하고 있지 뭐예요.
‘여기서 떨어지면 골로 가는 거여.’라고 생각한 그가 자신의 생명을 구할 최상의 방법이라 여기고서, 거기 수북이 쌓여 있던 귀리의 ‘짚’(낟알이 떨어지고 남은 줄기)들을 쥐어다가 새끼줄을 하나 ‘꼬기’(짚을 두 부분으로 서로 꼬는 것) 시작했어요.
그와 동시에 그가 하늘나라 여기저기에 놓여 있던 ‘괭이’(농기구. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/MYyLeH ) 하나와 ‘도리깨’(곡식의 낟알을 떠는 농기구. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/qjlfUX ) 하나를 와락 움켜쥐고는 새끼줄을 타고 내려왔어요.
그러다 덜컥 잘못하여 지상 위에 있던 깊고 깊은 구덩이 한 복판으로 정확히 떨어지고 말았지요.
하지만 그는 그래도 정말 운이 좋은 경우였어요. 왜냐면 괭이로 흙을 파서 한 계단씩 밝고 올라갈 수 있었으니까요. 또한 그가 지상 위로 다시 올라왔을 때엔, 자신이 하늘나라에 갔다 왔다는 사실을 아무도 부정할 수 없게 한 손에 진실의 징표인 그 도리깨를 쥐고 있었으니까 말이죠. 하늘나라의 그 도리깨 말이에요.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「하늘나라에서 가져온 도리깨」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「하늘나라에서 가져온 도리깨」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter112.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



113. 두 왕의 아이들



“16살 때 수사슴에 의해 죽을 운명을 타고난 아이”라는 예언을 듣고 태어난 작은 소년을 둔 왕이 옛날 옛적에 살고 계셨답니다.
소년은 그 나이가 되었을 때 휘하의 사냥꾼들과 함께 사냥을 하러 나갔지요.
숲에서 왕자님은 일행과 떨어졌는데 문득 저기에 그토록 찾던 큰 수사슴 한 마리가 보이기에 총을 쏘았지만 맞추질 못했지요.
결국 그는 그 수사슴을 쫓아 숲 아주 깊숙이까지 들어가게 되었는데, 어느 순간 수사슴은 온데간데없고 큰 키의 남자만이 서 있다 이렇게 말하는 거예요.
“너 딱 걸렸다. 널 쫓느라 내 아끼는 유리 스케이트만 여섯 벌을 버렸다(부서졌다). 이젠 놓치지 않는다 이놈.”
그길로 그는 왕자님을 끌고 큰 호수를 지나 큰 궁전에 도착했어요.
거기서 그는 왕자님을 식탁에 앉히곤 함께 식사를 들게 했어요.
그들이 다 먹고 나자 함께 식사를 했던 왕이 말했어요.
“내겐 딸아이가 셋이 있다. 넌 이제부터 하루씩 그 애들을 지켜야한다. 오늘은 큰딸애다. 저녁 9시부터 아침 6시까지 매 시각 시계가 울릴 때마다 내가 직접 가서 부르마, 만약 네가 내 대답에 답하지 않음 내일 아침 널 죽일 줄 알거라, 하지만 매 시각 대답을 잘하면 내 큰애를 네게 아내로 주마.”
청춘들이 침실로 드니(들어가니) ‘성(세인트) 크리스토퍼’(여행자의 수호 성자) 석상(조각상)이 하나 서 있었어요.
공주가 그 석상에 말했어요.
“9시부터 매 시각 시계가 울릴 때마다 아빠가 오셔서 부르시면 네가 왕자님 대신 대답을 하거라.”
그러자 그 석상이 재빨리 고개를 끄떡이기 시작해 차츰차츰 느려지더니 마침내는 멈춰버렸어요.
다음날 아침 왕이 왕자에게 말했어요.
“잘 했다, 하지만 내 딸을 내줄 순 없다. 오늘밤엔 둘째 딸애 옆에서 밤새 지키거라, 그럼 큰 딸애를 네 아내로 줄지 말지를 한 번 생각해보겠다, 다만 매 시각 내 말에 대답하지 못하면, 네 피가 바닥에 흥건히 젖실줄 알거라.”
그런 다음 둘은 잠자는 방으로 들어갔어요, 그 방에도 ‘성 크리스토퍼’(여행자의 수호 성자) 석상이 하나 서 있었는데 크기가 어제보다 훨씬 큰 석상이었어요.
공주님이 그 석상에게 말했어요.
“아빠가 부르심 네가 답해줘.”
그러자 그 거대한 석상이 또다시 민첩하게 고개를 끄떡이기 시작하더니 차츰차츰 느려져선 마침내 완전히 멈추고 말았지요.
왕자는 문지방 위에 드러누워 손으로 머리를 받치곤 잠이 들었답니다.
다음날 아침 왕이 왕자에게 말했어요.
“잘해냈다. 하지만 내 딸을 줄 순 없다. 오늘은 막내 딸애 옆에서 지키도록 하거라. 그럼 내 둘째 딸애를 네 아내로 줄지 말지를 한 번 생각해보겠다. 하지만 매 시각 내가 갔을 때 내 말에 대답하지 못하면 피로 물들일 줄 알거라.”
그런 다음 둘은 잠자는 방으로 들어갔어요, 그 방에도 ‘성 크리스토퍼’(여행자의 수호 성자) 석상이 하나 서 있었는데 키가 앞서보다 훨씬 큰 석상이었어요.
공주님이 그 석상에게 말했어요.
“아빠가 부르심 네가 답해줘.”
그러자 그 큰 키의 석상이 30분 동안이나 힘차게 고개를 끄떡이더니 마침내 완전히 멈추었어요.
왕자는 문지방 위에 드러누워 잠을 잤답니다.
다음날 아침 왕이 왕자에게 말했어요.
“잘해냈다. 하지만 당장은 내 딸애를 내줄 순 없다. 난 거대한 숲을 하나 가지고 있다. 만약 네가 오늘 아침 6시간부터 저녁 6시까지 거기 나무들을 몽땅 다 베어 넘기면 내 한 번 다시 생각해보마.”
그런 다음 왕은 왕자에게 유리 도끼 한 자루와, 유리 쐐기(브이V자 모양의 거) 하나와, 유리 망치 하나를 주었어요.
그 숲에 도착한 왕자가 냉큼 도끼질을 했다가 그만 도끼가 두 동강이 나고 말았어요. 그래서 쐐기를 꺼내 나무에다 대고 망치로 쳤더니 이번엔 모래알만큼이나 작게 산산조각이 나고 말지 뭐예요, 쐐기와 망치 둘 다 말이죠.
그래서 위기에 처한 왕자가 이젠 영락없이 죽는구나 하고 주저앉아 흐느끼기 시작했지요.
낮12시가 되자 왕이 말했어요.
“딸애들 중에 누가 먹을 걸 왕자에게 가져다주거라.”
“저흰 싫어요,”라며 두 언니들이 말했어요. “저흰 가지 않을 거예요, 그가 마지막으로 지킨 애보고 먹을 걸 가져다주라 하세요.”
그리하여 막내딸이 억지로 떠밀려 먹을 걸 가져다주게 되었죠.
숲에 들어온 그녀가 “잘 되시나요?”라고 물었지요.
“오,”라며 왕자가 말했어요. “설상가상에요.”
그런 다음 그녀는 그보다 와서 좀 먹어보라고 권했지요.
“아뇨,”라며 그가 말했어요. “그럴 수 없어요, 어차피 죽을 거 먹어서 뭐하게요.”
그러자 막내공주가 달래는 말투로 좀 드시라 권해서 왕자도 와서 좀 먹게 되었지요.
왕자가 다 먹고 나자 공주가 말했어요.
“제가 당신 머리를 빗어드리면 기분이 한결 나아지실 거예요.”
그렇게 그녀가 머리를 빗어주자, 왕자는 피곤해져선 잠이 들었답니다.
그러자 공주가 자신의 손수건을 꺼내 묶어 매듭을 하나 만들더니 땅에다 세 번 탁탁탁! 내려치며 말했어요.
“땅의 요정들아 어서 나오렴.”
순간 수많은 작은 요정들이 나오더니 “공주님 무슨 분부세요?”라며 물었어요.
그때 공주가 말했어요.
“3시간 안에 이 거대한 숲의 나무들을 다 베어 수북이 쌓아 놔주렴.”
그러자 작은 요정들이 우르르 흩어지더니 자신들의 온 친척들을 불러 이 일을 함께 했어요.
요정들은 시작하고 3시간 만에 일이 모두 끝낸 후 공주님한테로 와 “다 했어요”라고 말씀드렸지요.
그러자 공주가 자신의 흰 손수건을 다시 꺼내더니 말했어요.
“땅의 요정들아, 이제 집에 돌아가렴.”
그러자 그들이 싹 사라졌어요.
잠에서 깬 왕자가 너무도 기뻐하자, 공주님이 말했어요.
“6시 종이 울리면 집으로 돌아오세요.”
왕자는 그녀가 시킨대로 했어요. 
왕이 물었어요.
“그래 숲은 해결했느냐?”
“예.”라며 왕자가 말했어요.
그들이 식탁에 앉았을 때, 왕이 말했어요.
“아직은 내 딸을 네 아내로 주지 못하겠노라. 아직 내가 해야 될 게 남아 있거든.”
그래서 왕자는 “제가 어떻게 하면 되나요?”라고 물었지요.
“내겐 큰 ‘양어지’(물고기들을 인공적으로 기르는 연못)가 하나 있다.”라며 왕이 말했어요. “넌 내일 날이 밝는 대로 거기 가서 물이 투명 거울처럼 될 때까지 진흙을 싹 다 걷어내거라 그런 다음 온갖 종류의 물고기들로 양어지를 채우거라.”
다음날 아침에 왕은 왕자에게 유리 샵을 주며 말했지요.
“저녁 6시까지 양어지 일을 마치거라.”
그래서 왕자가 물러나 양어지로 가 진흙 속에다 샵을 한 번 파 보았더니 “쨍강!” 그리며 두 동강이 나지 뭐에요. 그래서 받은 괭이(곡괭이)로 진흙을 내리쳤더니 이번에도 또한 “쨍강!”하며 두 동강이 나고 말았지요.
그래서 그가 쩔쩔매고 있는데, 낮12시에 막내 공주님께서 점심식사를 가지고 와 “잘 되세요?”라고 묻는 거예요.
왕자가 자초지종을 말해주고 “이제 머리가 떨어질 일만 남았어요.”라고 말해주었지요.
“도구들이 죄다 부러지고 만 걸요.”
“오,”라며 공주님이 말했어요. “그래도 이리 오셔서 뭐라도 좀 드세요. 그럼 기분이 좀 좋아지실 거예요.”
“아뇨,”라며 왕자가 말했어요. “그럴 수 없어요, 이젠 영락없이 죽은 목숨인 걸요1”
그러자 공주님이 갖은 좋은 말들로 왕자를 어르고 달래 왕자가 결국 와서 점심을 먹었답니다.
그때 공주님이 다시 왕자의 머리를 빗겨주어 왕자는 스르르 잠이 들었지요.
그랬더니 공주님이 다시 한 번 자신의 손수건을 꺼내 묶은 다음 매듭을 하나 만들더니 땅에다 대고 그 매듭을 세 번 내리치며 말했어요.
“땅의 요정들아, 어서 나오렴.”
그 즉시 수많은 작은 요정들이 튀어나오며 “무슨 분부신가요, 공주님?”라며 물었고, 공주는 그들에게 “3시간 안에 양어지를 싹 다 청소해줘, 깨끗하게 말이야, 사람들이 들여다보면 자신들의 얼굴이 거울처럼 반사될 정도로. 그런 다음 온갖 종류의 물고기들도 넣어주고.”라고 말했지요.
작은 요정들은 흩어져 자신들의 친척들을 모두 호출한 다음 다시 와 2시간 만에 그 일을 몽땅 다 해버렸다빈다.
땅의 요정들이 공주님께 와 말했어요.
“분부하신 걸 다 했어요.”
공주님은 손수건을 꺼내 그걸로 다시 땅을 세 차례 내리치며 말했어요.
“땅의 요정들아, 이젠 집에 가보렴.”
그러자 모든 요정들이 물러갔답니다.
왕자가 깨어나 보니 양어지 청소 공사가 끝나 있지 뭐예요.
그래서 공주님은 왕자에게 “6시에 집에 오시면 돼요.”라고 말해주고 돌아갔답니다.
왕자가 그 시각에 집에 와 보니, 왕이 물었어요.
“그래 양어지 일을 다 했느냐?”
“예,”라며 왕자가 말했어요. 
처음치고는 아주 잘한 것이지요.
그들이 식탁에 앉았을 때, 왕이 말했어요.
“양어지 일을 끝냈다만 아직은 내 딸을 줄 수 없구나. 네가 한 가지 일을 더해줘야겠다.”
“그게 무엇인가요?”라며 왕자님이 물었어요.
왕이 말했어요. 
“내겐 큰 산이 하나 있는데, 거기엔 온통 가시나무들 뿐이다. 그러니 네가 가서 모두 베어내고, 산꼭대기에 거나하게 큰 성을 하나 지어놓거라, 누가 봐도 딱 부러지는 건물이어야한다. 모든 내부시설이며 가구들이 갖추어져있어야 한다.”
다음날 아침에 왕자가 깨어났을 때, 왕은 그에게 유리 도끼 한 자루와 유리 목공용 송곳 하나를 건네주며, “저녁 6시까지 공사를 마쳐야한다.”라고 말했어요.
왕자가 산으로 가 첫 번째 가시나무에 첫 번째 도끼질을 했더니 “쨍그랑!”하며 도끼가 부서지며 파편들이 주위로 흩뿌려지지 뭐예요, 목공용 송곳 또한 전혀 쓸모가 없기는 마찬가지였어요.(ㅜ.ㅜ)
이젠 모든 게 끝장이었지요, 그래서 왕자는 공주님이 오셔서 자신을 도와주길 간절히 바라고 있었어요.
그때 낮 12시가 되자 공주님이 점심을 들고 오셨어요.
왕자가 가서 그녀를 맞이하며 그동안의 일 진척을 말하며 점심을 먹었어요, 물론 공주가 자신의 머리를 빗겨주는 것도 허락했고요 그 덕에 왕자는 스스로 잠이 들었지요.
그때 공주는 한 번 더 매듭을 만들더니 그걸로 땅을 내리치며 말했어요.
“땅의 요정들아, 어서 나오렴!”
그러자 수많은 요정들이 솟아나와 “무슨 분부신가요, 공주님?”이라며 물었어요.
그때 공주가 말했어요.
“3시간 안에 여기 이 산의 모든 가시나무들을 다 베고 산꼭대기엔 튼실한 성을 하나 쌓아야 한단다. 그 성엔 모든 가구들이며 내부시설들도 다 갖추어져 있어야 하고.”
요정들이 우르르 사라지더니 자신의 일가친척들 모두를 데려와 함께 일을 하기 시작했지요.
모든 공사가 끝나자, 땅의 요정들이 공주님께 몰려와 “다했어요, 공주님”라고 말했어요.
그러자 공주님이 자신의 손수건으로 땅바닥을 세 번 내리치며 말했어요.
“땅의 요정들아, 이젠 집으로 돌아가렴.”
그러자 모든 요정들이 싹 사라졌지요.
그리하여 깨어난 왕자는 모든 게 이루어져 있는 걸 보고 하늘을 날듯이 기뻤답니다. 
6시 종이 울리자, 그들은 함께 집으로 갔어요.
그때 왕이 말했지요.
“성은 다 됐느냐?”
“네,”라며 왕자가 말했어요.
그들이 식탁에 앉았을 때, 왕이 말했어요.
“두 언니들이 결혼하기 전에 막내를 시집보내는 건 아닌 거 같다.”
그래서 왕자와 공주는 너무도 난처해졌지요, 특히나 왕자님은 이제 어찌해야할 바를 몰라 했답니다.
결국 그날 밤 왕자는 공주를 데리고 도망을 쳐버렸어요.
그들이 좀 벗어났을 때, 공주가 뒤를 힐끗 돌아보니 아빠가 쫓아오고 있었어요.
“오,”라며 공주가 말했어요. “이제 저희 어쩌죠? 제 아빠가 뒤쫓아오고 있어요, 이러다 곧 따라잡히겠어요. 일단 제가 당신을 가시덤불로 변신시키고 저는 그 속에 있는 한 송이 장미가 되겠어요, 가시덤불 속에 있음 안전할 거예요.”
아빠가 그 장소에 도착해보니, 가시덤불 속에 장미만 한 송이 있을 뿐이었지요. 그래서 아빠가 그 장미를 따려다 그만 가시에 손가락이 찔려 그냥 발길을 돌려야만 했답니다.
아내가 “왜 딸애와 함께 돌아오지 않았죠?”라고 물었어요.
그래서 왕이 말했지요.
“가 봤더니 딸은 온데간데없고 장미가 달린 가시덤불 하나만 자라고 있지 뭐요.”
그러자 왕비가 말했어요.
“장미를 따왔음 그 가시덤불도 따라왔을 거 아녜요.”
그래서 아빠가 그 장미를 따러 다시 길을 나섰지요, 비록 왕자와 공주가 꽤 멀리까지 간 상태였지만, 왕은 곧 그들을 뒤쫓을 수 있었어요.
공주가 힐끗 돌아보니 아빠가 맹렬히 쫓아오고 있는 게 보여 말했어요.
“오, 우리 이제 어쩌죠? 일단 제가 당신을 교회로 변신시키고 저는 그 안에 계신 목사님이 되어 설교단에서 설교를 하고 있겠어요.”
왕이 그 장소에 도착해보니, 교회가 서 있고, 목사님이 설교단에서 열심히 설교를 하고 있었어요.
왕은 그 설교를 열심히 듣다 다시 집으로 돌아갔지요.
그러자 왕비가 “왜 또 이번에도 그냥 오셨지요? 딸애는요?”라고 물어왔어요.
왕이 말했어요.
“웬걸, 뒤쫓아 가 다 따라잡았다 생각하는 순간, 교회 하나가 서 있고 설교단에서 목사님이 설교를 하시고 계시던걸.”
“그럼 그 목사님을 데려오면,”라며 그의 아내가 말했어요. “교회도 따라왔을 거 아니예요. 정말 당신은 아무짝에도 소용이 없다니까, 이번엔 제가 가 볼게요.”
왕비는 한 참을 걸어 저 멀리서 가고 있는 둘의 모습을 볼 수 있었어요.
공주가 힐끗 돌아보니 자신의 엄마가 뒤쫓아오고 있는 게 보여 말했어요.
“아 안 되겠어요, 이번엔 엄마가 직접 오셨어요. 제가 당신을 연못으로 변신시키고 전 그 속의 물고기로 변해있겠어요.”
엄마가 그 장소에 도착해보니, 큰 연못 하나가 있고, 그 한가운데서 물고기 한 마리가 이러 저리 첨벙거리며 물 밖 상황을 엿보고 있었지요. 물고기를 꽤 흥겨워보였어요.
왕비는 그 물고기를 잡고 싶었지만 별 수가 없었죠. 그래서 화가 머리끝까지 난 나머지 왕비가 물고기 한 마리를 잡으려고 온 연못의 물을 마시기 시작했어요. 하지만 그게 어디 쉽나요, 곧 왕비는 마신 물을 죄다 토해내고 말았고, 그래서 연못물이 다시 찰 수 있었죠.
그때 왕비가 소리쳤어요.
“별 수 없군. 나도 이제 알았으니 너희들도 본래 모습으로 돌아오거라.”
공주가 다시 본래 모습으로 돌아오자, 왕비는 자신의 딸아이에게 호두 세 개를 주며 말했어요.
“요긴할(크게 필요할) 때마다 하나씩 열어보거라, 도움이 돼줄 게다.”
그리하여 청춘 남녀는 다시 한 번 함께 길을 떠났지요.
그들은 16킬로미터(걸어서 4시간 거리)를 걸어, 왕자가 왔던 그 성에서 가장 가까이에 있는 어느 마을에 도착할 수 있었답니다.
거기 도착했을 때, 왕자가 말했어요.
“여기 있어, 자기, 내가 성으로 먼저 가서 마차와 수행원들을 데리고 당신을 마중 나올게.”
왕자가 성에 도착하니 사람들은 왕자가 다시 돌아온 걸 크게 반기었지요.
왕자가 말했지요.
“마을에 제 신부가 와 있습니다. 마차로 가서 그녀를 태워오려고요.”
그 즉시 사람들이 말들에 안장(말을 탈 때 깔고 앉는 거)을 메고 수많은 수행원들이 마차 곁에 즐비하게 늘어섰지요.
왕자가 막 마차에 오르려는데, 그의 엄마가 왕자에게 키스를 하자, 왕자가 그동안의 모든 일을 까맣게 잊고 말았어요.
왕자는 자신이 지금 무엇을 하려던 참인지도 기억하지 못했답니다.
그의 엄마는 마차에서 다시 말들을 풀게 하고 모두를 집에 돌려보냈지요.
처녀는 마을에 앉아 있었는데 아무리 기다리고 기다려보아도 자기를 마중 나오시기로 한 님이 오질 않는 거예요. 정말 아무도 오질 않았죠.
그래서 급한 대로 공주는 성에 소속된 방앗간에 일자리를 얻고, 못(방앗간에 딸린 연못)에 앉아 물통들을 깨끗이 청소해야했답니다.
그러던 하루는 왕비께서 성 밖에 도보로(걸어서) 나오셨다 못 옆을 지나가시다가, 참하게 생긴 아가씨가 보이자 말했지요.
“그 참 일 한번 똑 부러지게 하는 아이네! 내 마음에 들어!”
그러자 모두들 그 아가씨를 쳐다보았지만 누구도 그 아가씨가 누군질 알지 못했답니다.
그렇게 시간은 흐르고 흘러 아가씨는 그렇게 한 참을 그 방앗간에서 성실하고 훌륭하게 근무를 하였답니다.
한편 그러는 사이 왕비는 자신의 아들을 위한 아내를 찾는데 성공했지요.
신부가 저 멀리 떨어진 곳에서부터 왔어요.
신부가 도착하는 대로 그들의 결혼식이 곧 거행될 참이었지요.
수많은 사람들이 구경하려고 서로들 모여들었어요.
그때 아가씨가 방앗간 주인에게 말했지요.
“저도 잠시 가 봐도 되나요?” 
방앗간 주인이 말했어요.
“그래, 다녀오거라.”
출발하려던 찰나 아가씨는 자신의 엄마가 주신 호두 세 개 중 하나를 열어보았답니다. 그랬더니 그 안에서 아름다운 드레스 한 벌이 나오지 뭐예요.
그 옷을 입고 그녀는 교회로 가 제단 옆에 서 있었답니다.
불쑥 신부와 신랑이 입장해 제단 앞좌석들에 앉았지요.
목사님이 막 축복을 내려주시려 할 때, 살짝 눈길을 돌리던 신부의 눈에 아가씨가 들어온 거예요.
그러자 신부가 벌떡 일어서더니, “죽어도 저 아가씨가 입은 아름다운 드레스를 제가 입어야겠어요.”라고 말하는 거예요.
그래서 사람들은 다시 집으로 돌아가야 했지요. 그들은 도착하자마자 아가씨에게 “그 드레스를 팔 수 있는지?” 물었어요.
“아뇨,”라며 아가씨는 팔지 않으려 들었어요. “하지만 신부께선 이 옷을 얻으실 순 있으세요.”
“신부께서 어떻게 하면 되지요?”
아가씨가 말했어요.
“저를 왕자님 문 앞에서 하룻밤 잘 수 있게 해주시면 이 옷을 드릴게요.”
그래서 신부가 말했지요.
“좋아요, 그거야 뭐.”
하지만 신부는 하인들에게 명령했어요.
“왕자에게 잠 오는 약을 드리거라.”
그런 다음 아무 것도 모르는 아가씨는 문지방에 자리해 밤새 탄식을 했지요.
“제가 당신을 위해 그 숲의 나무들을 모두 베고, 양어지(인공적으로 물고기를 기르는 연못)를 청소해주고, 성을 지어주었잖아요. 그리고 위기 땐 당신을 가시나무로도, 그리고 교회로도, 마지막으로 연못으로도 변하게 해주었거늘, 그새 그걸 다 잊으신 건가요.”
왕자님은 그 말을 한 마디도 들을 수 없었지요. 하지만 하인들은 깨어있었기에 그 말들을 다 들을 수 있었지만 도통 무슨 말인지 알아들을 수가 없었지요.
다음날 아침 사람들이 모두 모였을 때, 신부는 그 드레스를 입고 신랑과 함게 교회로 향했답니다.
한편 그러는 사이 아가씨가 두 번째 호두를 열어보니 그 안에서 전보다 훨씬 더 아름다운 드레스 한 벌이 나오지 뭐예요.
아가씨가 또 그 옷을 입고 교회 제단 옆에 서 있었지요. 그러자 모든 게 전처럼 똑같이 발생했어요.
아가씨는 한 번 더 밤에 왕자님의 침실 문지방에 자리해 있을 수 있었고, 하인들도 잠 오는 약을 왕자에게 건네야했지요.
하지만 하인들이 이번엔 왕자에게 깨어있을 수 있는 약을 건네어주었답니다.
그런 다음 왕자가 침대에 드니 방앗간 아가씨가 문지방 앞에 자리하고 앉아선 목 놓아 울면서 그동안 있었던 모든 얘기들을 들려주지 뭐예요.
이 모든 걸 들은 왕자님은 과거의 일들이 다시 떠올라 몸이 아프고 불안했지요, 그래서 그녀를 방에 들이려했는데 이미 그의 엄마가 문에 빗장(문을 안에서 가로질러 잠그는 막대기)을 건 상태였지 뭐예요.
하지만 다음날 날이 밝자 왕자는 곧바로 자신의 연인에게로 가 자신에게 있었던 모든 일들을 들려주며 “내가 당신을 잊었다 화내기 말아주오”라고 사랑고백을 했지요.
그런 다음 공주님이 세 번째 호두를 열어보니 그 안에서 이전보다 훨씬 더 격조 높은 드레스 한 벌이 나오지 뭐예요.
공주님은 그 드레스를 입고 자신의 신랑과 함께 교회로 향했답니다.
길가에 수많은 아이들이 나와 그들을 향해 꽃을 뿌려주고 바닥에 화려한 리본들을 흩뿌려주었어요.
목사님이 그들에게 축복을 내리주어 결혼식은 더없이 명랑하게 진행되었답니다.
하지만 왕자의 부정직한 엄마와 신부는 그곳을 떠나야했지요.
방금 제게 이 얘기를 들려준 사람의 입술은 아직도 촉촉하답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「두 왕의 아이들」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「두 왕의 아이들」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter113.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



114. 영리한 꼬마 재단사



옛날에 아주 콧대 센 공주님이 한 분 살고 계셨어요.
구혼자들이 나타나면 그녀는 몇 가지 수수께끼를 내서 알아맞히게 하고는, 남자가 못 알아맞히면 매몰차게 쫓아 보냈죠.
그럼에도 그녀가 누구든 수수께끼를 맞힐 수 있게 했기에 시도해보겠다는 남자들이 많았답니다.
그리하여 결국엔 세 명의 ‘재단사’(치수대로 옷감을 자르는 사람)들까지 한 번 시도해보겠다 나섰지요.
그들 중 나이 많은 두 사람은 옷감을 자르는 솜씨도 너무도 빼어났기에 절대 수수께끼를 못 맟힐 리가 없다 확신했지요.
세 번째는 일이 서툴고 별 시답잖은 떠돌이 꼬마 재단사였는데요, 그는 자신의 운을 믿고 이 도전에 참여해야겠다 생각했지요, 이런 기회가 언제 또 오겠어요?
그러자 두 재단사들이 그에게 말했어요.
“넌 그냥 집구석에 있어, 일도 서툰 게 뭘 하겠다고 그래.”
하지만 꼬마 재단사는 기 죽지 않고 “나도 이 일에 한 번 도전해볼거라고요. 제가 그동안 머리를 써지 않아서 그렇지 한 번 굴리면 잘할 수 있다고요.”라며 마치 온 세상이 자신의 것이 된 양 말했어요.
그들 셋 모두 공주님 앞에 나아가 자신들은 바늘로 아주 정교한 일도 할 수 있을 만치 이해력이 뛰어나며 올 사람이 온 거라며 말했지요.
그래서 공주가 말했어요.
“제 머리엔 두 종류의 머리카락이 있어요, 그게 어떤 색깔이죠?”
“그건 모두,”라며 첫 번째 재단사가 말했어요. “검정색과 흰색입니다. 후추와 소금이라 불리는 천과 같습니다.”
공주가 말했어요.
“틀렸어요. 두 번째 분이 대답해보세요.”
그러자 두 번째 재단사가 말했어요.
“검정과 흰색이 아니라면, 저희 아빠의 회사 양복 상의처럼 갈색과 빨간색입니다.” 
“틀린 추측이세요.”라며 공주가 말했어요. “자, 세 번째 분이 대답해보세요. 제가 보니 당신은 이미 아시는 듯 하군요.”
그때 꼬마 재단사가 용감히 앞으로 나서며 말했어요.
“공주님 머리카락은 은색과 금색입니다. 서로 상이한 색깔들이지요.”
그 말을 들은 공주가 얼굴이 창백해지며 너무 놀라 하마터면 뒤로 까무러칠 뻔했어요. 왜냐면 꼬마 재단사가 알아맞혔기 때문이죠. 이 세상 어떤 남자도 절대 알 수 없을 거라 단단히 믿었거든요.
가까스로 용기를 되찾은 그녀가 말했어요.
“아직 다 된 건 아니에요. 하나 더 푸셔야 해요. 아래 가축우리엔 곰 하나마리가 있는데 당신은 그 곰과 하룻밤을 같이 보내셔야 해요. 아침이 돼서도 당신이 무사하시면 당신은 저와 결혼식을 올리게 되실 거예요.”
하지만 그녀는 속으로 생각하고 있었어요.
‘이러면 이 재단사를 죽일 수 있어. 그 곰은 자기 수중에 들어온 사람은 누구든 죽이니까.’
꼬마 재단사는 겁먹지 않고 아주 기뻐하며 말했어요.
“대담하게 나서는 게 반은 이미 이기는 거죠.”
저녁이 되자 사람들이 꼬마 재단사를 곰에게로 데려다주었어요.
즉시 곰이 꼬마 친구에게 달려들어 자신의 앞발들로 한 방 먹이려했어요.
“워, 워.”라며 꼬마 재단사가 말했어요. “내가 곧 너를 조용하게 해줄 테니.”
세상에 어떤 걱정거리도 없다는 양 그가 태평스레 자신의 호주머니 속에서 호두 몇 개를 꺼내 우두둑 까더니 호두열매를 먹었어요.
곰은 보다 말고 자신도 호두 몇 개만 먹고 싶단 열망에 사로잡혔어요.
재단사가 호주머니에 손을 넣더니 한 움큼 내밀었어요. 하지만 그건 호두가 아니라 조약돌이었어요.
곰은 그걸 자기 입 안에 넣곤 힘껏 깨물었지만 하나도 깔 수가 없었어요.
‘어라!’라며 곰이 생각했어요. ‘내가 이토록 얼간이였나! 호두 하날 못 까잖아!’
그래서 곰이 재단사에게 말했어요.
“어이, 호두 몇 개만 까줘.”
“원, 저런 바보 같은 친구를 봤나!”라며 꼬마 재단사가 말했어요. “그렇게 큰 입을 가지고도, 이 작은 호두 하날 못 까네!”
그때 그가 그 조약돌을 받아 재빨리 호두와 바꾸곤 자기 입에 넣곤 우두둑 깨물었지요, 그게 두 동강이 나고 말았어요!
“어라, 내가 한 번만 더 해보께.”라며 곰이 말했어요. “네가 하는 걸 보니, 나도 할 수 있겠는 걸.”
그러자 재봉사가 다시 한 번 곰에게 조약돌을 하나 건넸고, 곰은 깨물고 또 깨물고 별 수를 다 써보았지만 힘이 먹혀들지가 않았어요.
곰이 해냈을 거라 아무도 생각지 않을 테니까요.
그게 끝나자, 재단사가 이번엔 외투 속에서 바이올린 한 대를 꺼내 한 소절 연주하기 시작했어요.
곰이 음악을 듣다 말고 저절로 춤을 추기 시작하더니 한 참을 다 추고는 만족스럽던지 꼬마 재단사보고 말했어요.
“만세, 바이올린 켜기 어려워?”
“꼬마도 금방 배워. 봐, 왼쪽 손가락으로 여길 누르고, 오른쪽 손가락으로 활(악가의 활)을 켜면 돼, 그럼 흥겨운 소리가 나온단다, 따라라따 라라 랄라라!”
“그래,”라며 곰이 말했어요. “나도 한 번 해볼 수 있겠는데, 그럼 내 생각대로 바이올린을 켜면서 춤도 출 수 있잖아. 네 생각은 어때? 좀 가르쳐줄래?”
“기꺼이.”라며 재단사 말했어요. “네게 재능만 있다면야. 그 전에 우선 네 손톱 좀 보자구나, 엄청 기네, 내가 좀 잘라줄게.”
그런 다음 ‘바이스’(고정시키는 장치. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/m5jVSx )를 가져오더니 곰의 손톱들을 그 속에 넣더니 단단히 꽉 조이곤 말했어요.
“자 내가 가위를 가져올 때까지 기다려봐.”
그리곤 곰이 으르렁거리던 말던 내버려두곤 재단사는 구석에 있던 밀짚 한 덩이 위에 드러누워 쿨쿨 잠을 잤어요. 
곰이 밤새도록 사납게 으르렁 거리는 소리를 들은 공주는 뛸 듯이 기뻐 어쩔 줄을 몰랐어요, 재단사가 틀림없이 물려죽은 거라 생각했거든요.
아침이 되어 마냥 행복한 마음으로 깬 공주가 가축우리 안을 힐끔 들여다봤더니 어머나 재단사가 팔팔하게 자기 앞에 서 있는 거예요. 재단사는 물 만난 물고기 마냥 건강했지요.
이제 공주도 사람들 앞에서 자기 입으로 한 말이라 결혼식을 두 번 물릴 순 없었어요. 
그래서 왕은, 공주가 재단사를 태우고 교회로 가 결혼식을 올리고 돌아올 수 있게 마차를 보내주었지요.
그들이 마차에 올라탔을 때, 꼬마 재단사의 행운에 질투심을 느낀 나쁜 재단사 두 사람이 가축우리로 들어가 곰을 다시 풀어주었어요.
곰이 사납게 마차 뒤를 뒤쫓아 오기 시작했어요.
곰이 짖는 울음소리를 들은 공주가 화들짝 놀라 비명을 질렀어요.
“아, 곰이 우릴 뒤쫓고 있어요, 당신을 헤치려나 봐요!”
재단사가 재빨리 물구나무를 서더니 자신의 두 다리를 창밖으로 내밀며 소리쳤어요.
“이 ‘바이스’(고정시키는 장치) 보이지? 물러가지 않음 다시 채운다.”
곰이 바이스를 보더니 황급히 몸을 돌려 달아나버렸어요.
재단사는 유유히 마차를 몰고 교회로 갔고요, 공주님도 그와 혼인식을 올렸어요.
재단사는 ‘숲종다리’(=참새. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/ntsZ32 )처럼 행복하게 공주님과 잘 살았답니다.
믿지 않으시겠거든, 은화 한 개를 걸어도 좋아용~♥.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「영리한 꼬마 재단사」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「영리한 꼬마 재단사」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter114.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



115. 빛나는 햇빛이 밝혀주리



수습 재봉사가 일자리를 찾아 세상을 여행하고 있었어요. 그런데 일자리가 하나도 없지 뭐예요. 그리고 가지고 간 은화도 다 떨어져 빈털터리가 되고 말았죠.
그러다 그는 길에서 어느 유대인 한 명을 만났어요.
아무래도 그 유대인이 큰돈을 가지고 있을 거 같다는 생각이 든 재봉사가 양심을 저버리고서 대뜸 유대인의 멱살을 잡으며 말했어요.
“돈 내놔, 안 그럼 때려죽일 테다.”
그러자 유대인이 말했어요.
“살려주십시오, 저는 은화 8개 외엔 아무것도 없습니다.” 
하지만 재봉사가 말했어요.
“돈 가지고 있잖아. 그걸 내놓으란 말이다.”
급기가 그는 폭력을 사용하더니 유대인이 거의 죽기 직전까지 때렸어요.
유대인이 죽으면서 마지막 말을 남겼지요.
“빛나는 햇빛이 밝혀주리.”
그 후 즉시 유대인은 죽고 말았지요.
수습 재봉사는 그의 호주머니에 손을 집어넣고 돈을 찾아보았지만 은화 8개 외엔 아무 것도 없었어요. 유대인이 한 말이 맞았던 거지요.
그런 다음 그가 유대인을 들어 나무 덤불 아래로 옮겨놓곤 자신은 일자리를 찾아 계속 길을 떠났어요.
한참을 여행한 후, 그는 어느 마을에서 일자리를 구했어요.
그의 주인은 예쁜 딸을 둔 주인이었죠.
곧 그와 그녀는 사랑에 빠졌고 결혼을 해 행복한 결혼생활을 영위했답니다.
한참 후 그와 아내 사이에 두 아이가 생겨났고, 장인 영감과 장모님 모두 돌아가시고, 젊은 부부가 온전히 집안을 이끌어가게 되었죠.
어느 날 아침 남편이 창문 아래에 있는 식탁에 앉아 있을 때, 아내가 커피를 가져다주었어요.
그가 그걸 커피 잔에 따르고 막 마시려던 찰나, 햇빛이 커피 위에 비치며 벽 여기저기에 원형 모양의 어렴풋한 빛들을 여럿 만들었어요.
그때 재봉사가 올려다보며 말했지요.
“음, 햇빛이 밝혀주는 게 잘 안 되는 모양이군!”
여자가 말했어요.
“오, 여보, 그게 뭐죠, 네? 무슨 말이죠?”
그가 대답했어요.
“당신한테 한 말이 아냐.”
하지만 그녀는 말했어요.
“저를 사랑하신다면 말해주세요.”
그녀는 온갖 아양을 떨며 아무에게도 말하지 않을 테니 말해 달라며 남편을 가만 두지 않았지요.
그래서 그가 아내에게 몇 년 전에 그가 일자리를 구하며 세상을 떠돌아다니다 땡전 한 닢 없게 되어 어느 유대인을 죽이게 되었는데 그 유대인이 마지막 유언을 남기길, “빛나는 햇빛이 밝혀주리.”라고 말했다 얘기해주었어요.
그래서 지금 햇빛이 그걸 밝혀주려 벽 위에 원형으로 어렴풋한 빛들을 여럿 만들었지만 그게 잘 되지 않는 모양이라고도 말해주었지요.
그 후 그는 지금 한 얘긴 누구에게도 말하지 말라며 그렇지 않으면 자신이 목숨을 잃게 된다고 아내에게 말했고, 아내도 약속을 했지요.
하지만 그가 다시 자리에 앉아 일을 하자마자, 그녀는 자신의 절친한 친구를 찾아가 그 비밀을 털어놓았지요. 하지만 그녀 외에는 어느 누구에게도 발설하지 않았어요.
하지만 이틀도 안 돼서, 온 도시에 그 사실이 퍼져, 재봉사는 재판에 회부되고 유죄를 선고받았어요.
결국 빛나는 햇빛이 모든 걸 밝혀준 것이지요.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「빛나는 햇빛이 밝혀주리」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「빛나는 햇빛이 밝혀주리」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter115.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



116. 파란 불꽃 (푸른 등잔불)



옛날에 수년 동안을 왕을 위해 충실히 봉사했던 한 병사가 있었어요.
그러다 전쟁이 끝이 날 때쯤 그 병사가 수많은 상처를 입었기에 더는 군인으로 복무를 할 수 없었지요.
왕이 그에게 말했어요.
“네 집에 가거라, 더는 네 봉사가 필요없다. 돈도 땡전 한 푼 못 준다. 왜냐면 나는 나에게 봉사하는 자에게만 보수를 주기 때문이다.”
그리하여 그 병사는 밥벌이 수단 하나 없이 그냥 내쫓겨 하루 종일 걸어 저녁 무렵 어느 숲에 들어서게 되었답니다. 
어둠이 내려깔리자, 그가 불빛 하나를 보았어요.
그가 거리로 가 보니 그건 마녀가 사는 집이었지요.
“하룻밤만 묵게 해주십시오, 먹을 거랑 마실 것도 좀 주시면 고맙고요.”라고 그가 그녀에게 말했어요. “안 그럼 정말 굶어죽기 일보직전이거든요.”
“오호!”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “누가 떠돌이 병사를 받아줄 거 같아? 하지만 동정심이 생기니 널 받아주지, 다만 내가 시킨 일을 해야 한다.”
“그게 뭔데요?”라며 병사가 말했어요. 
“내일, 나대신 정원만 파헤쳐주면 된다.” 
병사도 동의했지요.
그래서 다음날 힘들게 하루를 꼬박 일했답니다. 하지만 저녁이 되도록 다 마치지 못했죠.
“오늘은,”라며 마녀가 말했어요. “그쯤하면 됐다. 대신 내일은 다른 일을 시키마, 한 짐의 나무를 잘게 잘라다오.”
병사는 다음 날에 하루 종일 일해 그 일을 다 할 수 있었어요.
그래서 저녁이 되어 마녀로부터 하룻밤 더 머물라는 제안을 받았죠.
“내일은, 훨씬 더 쉬운 일을 시키마. 집 뒤에 오래된 마른 우물이 하나 있는데 그 안에 불꽃을 하나 떨어뜨리고 말았지 뭐냐, 파란 불꽃이다. 절대 꺼지는 법이 없지. 넌 그걸 나에게 다시 건져다주면 된다.”
다음날 노파가 그를 데리고 우물로 가 바구니 안에 그를 앉게 해 내려주었어요.
그가 ‘파란 불꽃’(←‘신호용 파란 불꽃’을 의미함. 또는 ‘푸른 등잔불’)을 찾았답니다. 그래서 다시 끌어올려달라 신호를 보냈지요.
그녀가 그를 끌어올려주다, 그가 그의 모서리에 다다를 때쯤, 그녀가 손을 아래로 내밀더니 파란 불꽃을 먼저 달라 말했어요.
“안 돼요,”라며 그가 말했지요. 마녀의 나쁜 의도를 단번에 알아챘거든요. “제 두 발로 다시 땅 위에 설 때까진 당신에게 이 파란 불꽃을 먼저 줄 순 없어요.”
마녀가 벌컥 성을 내며 그는 다시 우물 아래로 내리곤 “쌩”하니 가 버렸어요.
축축한 흙 위에 떨어졌기에 다행히 불쌍한 병사는 한 군데도 다치진 않았죠. 그리고 그 파란 불꽃도 꺼지지 않았고요. 하지만 이게 그에게 뭔 소용이 있었겠어요? 그가 우물을 살펴보았지만 어디에도 빠져나갈 구멍은 없었거든요.
그는 한동안 상심에 겨워 앉아 있었어요. 그러다 불쑥 호주머니 속에서 뭔가가 느껴져 손을 집어넣어보니 반쯤 채워진 ○배 파이프가 나오지 뭐예요.
‘이걸로 내 마지막 위안을 삼아야겠군.’라며 그가 생각하며 파란 불꽃에 대고 불을 붙여 피우기 시작하자 연기가 나기 시작했답니다.
연기는 모락모락 나며 동굴(우물) 속에서 원을 그려나갔어요.
그때 별안간 검은 난쟁이 한 명이 그의 앞에 떡하니 서 있는 게 아니겠어요.
난쟁이가 말했어요.
“주인님, 분부만 내려주십시오?”
“무슨 분부를요?”라며 병사가 화들짝 놀라 말했지요.
“전 당신이 지시하는 건 뭐든 따라야한답니다.”라며 난쟁이가 말했어요. 
“그 잘 됐네,”라며 병사가 말했어요. “그렇담 우선 나 좀 이 우물에서 꺼내줘.”
난쟁이가 그의 손을 붙잡더니 어느 지하 통로 속으로 그를 인도했어요. 물론 그는 파란 불꽃을 챙겨가는 걸 잊지 않았다네요.
나오는 도중 그 난쟁이가 그에게 마녀가 숨겨두고 모아둔 보물들도 보여주었지요, 그래서 병사는 들고 나갈 수 있는 만큼 잔뜩 금화들을 챙겨 나왔답니다.
다시 위로 나왔을 때, 그가 난쟁이에게 말했어요.
“이제 가서 그 늙은 마녀를 묶어 판사님 앞에 끌고 나려무나.”
곧 들(들고양이)수고양이 등에 올라탄 그녀가 비명을 지르며 바람만큼 빨리 지나가는 게 보였어요.
그 후 머지않아 난쟁이가 다시 나타나더니 말했어요.
“다 했습니다,”라며 난쟁이가 말하더니 물었어요. “마녀는 벌써 교수형에 처해져 목이 매달렸어요. 또 다른 분부는 없으신지요, 주인님?”
“당장은 됐구나.”라며 병사가 말했어요. “일단은 집에 가 있다, 내가 다시 호출하면 즉시 나오려무나.”
“언제든 제가 필요하심 그 파란 불꽃에 대고 파이프에 불만 붙이면 됩니다. 그럼 내가 즉시 대령해 있을 겁니다.”
그 후 즉시 난쟁이가 눈앞에서 사라졌어요.
병사는 자신이 나왔던 그 도시로 다시 들어갔어요.
그는 최고급 여관으로 가 멋진 옷들을 주문하고 주인장에게도 자신이 묵을 방을 가능한 한 멋지게 꾸며 달라 주문을 했지요.
준비가 다 되자 병사가 파란 불꽃과 파이프를 손에 집으며 검은 난쟁이를 호출해 말했어요.
“나는 지금껏 왕을 위해 충실해 봉사해왔다. 하지만 내가 얻은 거라곤 무자비한 해고와 굶주림뿐이었다. 그래서 복수를 해주고 싶구나.”
“제가 어찌하면 좋겠나이까?”라며 난쟁이가 물었어요.
“밤늦게, 공주가 침대에 들면, 자고 있는 그녀를 이리로 데려오거라, 내 그녀가 나를 위해 봉사하도록 시킬 것이다.”
난쟁이가 말했어요.
“그 일은 제겐 쉽지만, 주인님께서 큰 위험에 빠질 수 있습니다. 왜냐면 발각되면 주인님이 곤경에 처할 거거든요.”
시계가 밤 12시를 가리키며 치자, 문이 벌컥 열리며, 그 난쟁이가 공주를 데리고 왔어요.
“아하! 오셨군?”라며 병사가 소리쳤어요. “당장 일을 시켜야지! 빗자루를 가지고 침실을 쓰시오.”
공주가 그 일을 다 마치자, 그가 그녀를 자신의 의자로 부르더니, 자신의 발을 내밀며 말했어요.
“내 장화부터 벗기시오.”
그런 다음 그가 장화를 그녀의 얼굴에 내던지며, 그녀가 그 장화들을 다시 주워 깨끗이 닦아 광을 내도록 시켰어요.
하지만 그녀는 그가 시키는 대로 모든 일을 군말 없이 했답니다. 반쯤 졸린 상태라 이게 꿈인지 생시인지 헷갈거든요.
첫 닭이 울자, 난쟁이가 다시 그녀를 이고 궁전으로 가 그녀의 침대에 눕혀주었어요.
다음날 아침에 공주가 일어나 아빠에게 가 자신이 꾼 대단히 낮선 꿈에 대해 얘기를 들려주었어요.
“제가 번갯불보다 더 빠르게 거리들을 훑으며 지나갔어요.”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “그러다 어느 병사의 방으로 들어갔는데, 그가 저를 하녀처럼 일을 시키는 바람에, 방을 쓸고, 그의 장화를 닦고, 그 밖의 온갖 집안일들을 다해줘야 했어요. 그런데 이게 꿈이라고만 하기엔, 제가 진짜로 그 일들을 한 양 지금 피곤하지 뭐예요.”
“그 꿈은 참일 수도 있다,”라며 왕이 말했어요. “내 한 마디 일러주마. 일단 완두콩들로 네 호주머니를 잔뜩 채우고 구멍을 작게 내거라. 그럼 누가 너를 이고 또 다시 가게 되면 그 완두콩들이 하나씩 떨어지며 거리에 흔적을 남기게 될 것이다.”
하지만 왕에게 보이지 않는 그 난쟁이가 몰래 왕 옆에 서 있다 왕이 말하는 것을 다 듣고 말았답니다.
밤에 잠든 공주를 다시 이고 거리를 달릴 때, 정말 그녀의 호주머니에서 완두콩들이 하나씩 떨어졌지만, 흔적은 남지 않았답니다. 왜냐면 교활한 난쟁이가 도시에 있는 모든 거리에 완두콩들을 흩뿌려놓았기 때문이지요.
공주는 다시 한 번 첫닭이 울 때까지 집안일들을 해야 했어요.
다음 날 아침 왕이 부하들을 시켜 흔적들을 찾게 했지만, 헛수고였어요, 모든 거리마다 가난한 집 아이들이 앉아서 완두콩을 주으며 말하고 있었기 때문이지요.
“어젯밤 완두콩 비가 내렸나봐.”
“딴 수를 써야겠다,”라며 왕이 말했어요. “네가 잘 때 구두를 잘 챙겨 놓거라. 그리고 누가 널 이고 간 곳에서 다시 나오기 전에 그걸(구두) 거기에 잘 숨겨두거라. 그럼 내가 부하들을 시켜서라도 그걸 찾아내게 할 테니.”
검은 난쟁이가 이 계획을 들었어요. 그래서 밤에 병사가 또 다시 공주를 데려오라는 분부를 내리자, 자초지종을 알려주며 왕의 이번 계획을 빠져나갈 방법은 없다고 말했지요. 만에 하나 그녀가 정말로 구두를 병사의 집에 숨기는 날엔, “만사가 주인님에게 있어 잘 되지 않을 거”란 거였지요.
하지만 병사는 “내가 시킨 거나 해.”라며 대꾸해버렸지요.
그리하여 세 번째 밤에도 공주가 와서 하녀처럼 일을 해야 했어요. 그녀는 대신 끝나기 전에 병사의 침대 밑에 자신의 구두를 숨겨놓았답니다.
다음날 아침 왕이 부하들을 시켜 온 도시를 샅샅이 뒤져 공주의 구두를 찾게 했어요.
결국 병사의 집에서 그게 발견되었지요.
그나마 다행인 건 난쟁이가 누누이 말한 결과 그때쯤엔 병사가 성문 밖으로 도망쳐 있었다는 거지요. 
하지만 그의 운은 그리 오래 가지 못해, 그는 금방 붙잡혀 감옥에 갇히고 말았답니다.
게다가 워낙에 황급히 도망치다 잡힌 거라 귀중품들을 챙기는 것도 잊고 말았지요. 파란 불과 금화 말이에요.
호주머니를 뒤져보기 금화 딸랑 한 닢만 있었지요.
그가 쇠사슬들에 묶여 지하 감방 창문에 서 있는데, 우연히도 옛 동료가 지나가고 있는 게 보였어요.
병사는 유리창을 두드려 옛 동료를 다가오게 한 다음 말했어요.
“보게, 여관으로 가서 내가 두고 온 작은 보따리 하나만 챙겨다주게나, 그럼 내 자네에게 이 금화 한 닢을 주지.”
그의 동료가 냉큼 거기로 달려가더니 그가 원하던 것을 가져다주었지요.
병사가 다시 홀로 되자마자, 그가 파이프에 불을 붙여 검은 난쟁이를 호출했어요.
“두려워 마십시오,”라며 난쟁이가 자신의 주인에게 말했어요. “저들이 주인님을 어디로 끌고 가든, 그 파란 불꽃만 잘 간수해 가지고 가신다면 저를 호출하실 수 있습니다.”
다음날 병사는 재판에 붙여졌어요. 그런데 그가 나쁜 짓을 한 게 하나도 없었음에도 판사가 그에게 사형을 내려버렸어요.
그는 죽으러 끌려가며 왕께 마지막 소원하나만 들어달라 간청했지요.
“그게 뭐냐?”라며 왕이 물었어요.
“그저 제 파이프 ○배를 한 번만 더 피워보는 것입니다요.”
“좋다, 딱 세 모금만 빨 거라.”라며 왕이 대답했어요. “하지만 목숨을 구걸할 생각일랑은 하질 말아라.”
그런 다음 그 병사는 자신의 파이프 ○배를 꺼내 ‘파란 불꽃’(←‘신호용 파란 불꽃’의 의미임. 또는 ‘푸른 등잔불’)에다 대고 불을 피웠어요, 그러자마자 ○배연기의 동그라미가 몇 번 모락모락 피어오르더니 그 난쟁이가 손에 작은 몽둥이를 하나 쥐고서 떡하니 서서 말했어요.
“무슨 분부십니까, 주인님?”
“저기 저 거짓된 판사를 죽도록 매질해줘라, 그리고 판사의 경찰관들도 같이, 그리고 내게 너무도 못되게 군 왕도 빼지 말고.”
그러자 난쟁이가 마치 번갯불처럼 그들 위를 덮치며 인정사정없이 몽둥이찜질들을 해대는데, 일단 사람들이 그의 몽둥이에 닿기만 하면 이건 뭐 아작이 나선 쓰러진 채 꿈쩍을 못하는 거예요.
왕이 두려움에 떤 나머지 그 병사에게 자비를 구하며 목숨만 살려 달라 빌고 또 빌었지요.
그래서 왕은 자신의 왕국을 그 병사에게 주고 공주도 아내로 내주었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「파란 불꽃 (푸른 등잔불)」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「파란 불꽃 (푸른 등잔불)」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter116.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



117. 고집불통 아이



옛날에 고집불통인 아이가 살았어요.
어찌나 고집을 부리는지 엄마가 시키는 건 하나도 안 하려했지요.
그런 까닭에 하느님께서도 그녀에게서만은 기쁨을 찾을 수 없으셨고, 그리하여 그녀가 병이 들게 되었지요.
어떤 의사도 그녀의 병을 고칠 수 없었고 머지않아 그녀는 죽음에 이르게 되었답니다.
사람들이 그녀를 무덤 속에 내리고 위에 흙을 덮어주는데, 불쑥 그녀의 팔이 되나오더니 위로 척 뻗는 거예요.
그래서 사람들이 다시 팔을 집어넣고 위에 새로 흙을 덮었는데, 금방 또 소용없게도, 팔이 불쑥 다시 튀어나왔어요.
그래서 어쩔 수 없이 엄마가 무덤으로 가 회초리로 딸애의 팔을 때리자, 그제야 되나왔던 팔이 들어가며 마침내 딸아이도 땅 밑에서 쉴 수 있었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「고집불통 아이」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「고집불통 아이」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter117.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



118. 세 군의관



자신들의 의술이 최고라 자신하고 있던 세 군의관(군대 의사)이 세상을 여행하고 있었지요.
그들은 하룻밤 묵고 싶어 어느 여인숙에 들어갔답니다.
주인이 어디서 오시는 길이시며 어디로 가시는 길이냐고 물었어요.
“저희들은 세상을 이리저리 돌아다니면서 의술을 실천해보고 있습니다.”
“그 한 번 보여주실 수 있으십니까.”라며 주인이 말했어요.
그러자 첫 번째 의사가 자신은 팔을 잘랐다가 내일 아침에 다시 붙이겠다 말했어요, 두 번째 의사는 자신은 심장을 떼었다가 내일 아침에 다시 붙이겠다 말했고요, 세 번째 의사는 자신의 두 눈을 뽑았다가 내일 아침에 다시 접합하겠다 말했지요.
“만약 그렇게만 된다면야,”라며 여인숙주인이 말했어요. “의술에 도가 터신 거지요.”
하지만 그들은 들고 다시는 작은 병 안에 연고를 하나 넣어 다니고 있었어요. 그 연고를 바르면 뭐든지 접합할 수 있었답니다.
그런 다음 그들은 자신들이 말한 대로 머리와 심장과 눈을 신체에서 잘라내 접시에 담아 여인숙주인에게 맡겼어요.
여인숙주인이 하녀를 불러 찬장 속에 넣어두고 잘 관수(보관)하게 시켰어요.
하지만 그 아가씨에겐 몰래 만나는 연인이 있었어요. 그는 병사였어요.
그리하여 여인숙주인과 세 군의관과 그 밖에 집에 있던 모두가 잠이 들자, 그 병사가 찾아와 먹을 걸 좀 달라 말했어요.
아가씨가 찬장을 열고 음식을 좀 내와 그에게 주다, 연인이 옆에 있는 게 들떠 그만 찬장 문을 닫는 걸 깜빡하고 말았어요.
그녀는 연인과 탁자에 앉아 둘이 그냥 끝없이 재잘거렸어요.
그녀가 생각도 못하고 다만 연인에게 만족하며 앉아 있는 사이, 고양이가 기어들어왔다가 찬장이 열린 걸 보곤 세 군의관들의 손과 심장과 두 눈을 물어가지고 달라나버렸어요.
병사가 식사를 마쳤을 때, 아가씨는 꺼내온 식기들을 다시 찬장에 넣으려다가 여인숙주인이 그녀에게 신신당부하며 맡긴 접시가 텅 비어있는 걸 발견했어요.
깜짝 놀란 그녀가 연인에게 말했어요.
“아, 지지리도 못난 나, 이제 어쩌니? 손이 사라졌어, 심장과 두 눈도 같이. 내일 아침 나 어째?”
“침착해,”라며 그가 말했어요. “밖 교수대에 어느 도둑이 매달려 있는데 내가 가서 손을 잘라올게. 어느 쪽 손이니?”
“오른손이야.”
그런 다음 아가씨가 그에게 잘 드는 식칼을 주었고, 그는 나가서 그 불쌍한 죄인의 오른손을 싹둑 잘라 그녀에게 주었어요.
이후 그는 그 문제의 고양이를 잡아 두 눈을 뽑아냈어요. 이제 모자란 건 심장뿐이었지요.
“어제 죽은 거 없어, 지하실에 죽은 돼지가 있다고 그랬잖아?”라며 그가 말했어요.
“아 맞다.”라며 아가씨가 말했어요.
“잘 됐네.”라며 병사가 내려가더니 돼지 심장을 떼어왔어요.
아가씨는 그 모두를 접시 위에 담고 다시 찬장에 넣어두었지요. 그런 다음 그녀는 자신의 연인과 작별인사를 하고 난 다음 자러 침대에 들었답니다.
아침이 되어 세 군의관들이 일어나더니 아가씨(하녀)보고 어제 맡긴 손과 심장과 두 눈이 담긴 접시를 가져오라 말했어요.
그녀가 찬장에서 꺼내 주니, 첫 번째 군의관은 도둑의 손을 자신의 팔에 붙이곤 연고로 문질러 곧장 자신의 온전한 팔로 만들었어요. 두 번째 군의관은 고양이의 두 눈을 자신의 머리에 넣었고요, 세 번째 군의관은 돼지의 심장을 자신의 원래 위치에 고정시켰어요.
옆에 지켜보던 여인숙주인은 그들의 의술에 감탄해마지 않으며 이런 기술은 생전 처음 봤다며 칭찬해마지 않았죠. 그가 모두에게 세 군의관들을 추천해주었답니다.
그런 다음 군의관들은 숙박비를 지불한 다음 다시 여행을 떠났어요.
그렇게 그들이 길을 가는데, 돼지 심장을 붙인 군의관이 가다말고 느닷없이 구석탱이로 달려다더니 코를 마치 돼지처럼 땅에 처박곤 움직이질 않으려는 거예요.
다른 사람들이 그의 외투자락을 잡아당기며 말렸지만 소용없었죠. 그는 세상에 더러운 것이라면 어디든 달려갔어요.
두 번째 군의관도 낯선 행동을 하긴 마찬가지였지요. 그는 두 눈을 비비며 다른 사람에게 말했어요.
“어이, 이상하지 않아? 눈이 전혀 안 보여. 나 좀 잡아죠, 안 그럼 넘어지겠단 말이야.”
그리하여 그들이 어려움을 뚫고 가까스로 저녁에 또 다른 여인숙에 도착할 수 있었어요.
그들이 카운터(계산대)에 들어서니, 구석에 있는 탁자에 부자 한 명이 앉아 돈을 세고 있었어요.
도둑의 손을 붙인 군의관이 그 부자 주위를 맴돌더니 불쑥 불쑥 두 번이나 팔을 뻗었다 가까스로 움켜쥐며 도로 넣는 거예요. 그러다 마침내 부자가 잠시 한 눈 팔 동안, 돈을 한 움큼 집더니 호주머니에 넣었죠.
그들 중 한 명이 이걸 보다말고 기가 차 말했어요.
“어이, 이게 대체 무슨 짓인가? 돈을 훔치다니 부끄러운 줄을 알아야지!”
“어,”라며 그가 말했어요. “나도 내가 내 마음대로 안 돼? 손이 그냥 내 의지와는 상관없이 저절로 뻗어서 움켜쥔 거야.”
이후, 그들이 자려고 누웠는데, 방은 아주 어두워 자신의 손도 잘 보이지 않을 정도였지요.
그와 동시에 고양이의 눈을 붙인 군의관이 벌떡 일어나며 다른 사람을 깨우더니 말했어요.
“이보게들, 방금 흰 생쥐가 뛰어간 거 못 보았나?”
두 사람이 일어나 쳐다보았지만 아무 것도 안 보였지요.
그러자 그가 말했어요.
“뭔가 잘못됐어, 아무래도 우리들 것을 붙인 게 아닌가봐. 그 여인숙주인한테 다시 가보세, 그가 우릴 속이게 분명하니.” 
그리하여 그들이 다음 날 아침부로 돌아가 주인에게 자신들이 본래 것을 붙인 게 아니라 말했어요.
첫 번째 군의관은 도둑의 손을 붙였고, 두 번째 군의관은 고양이의 두 눈을 붙였고, 세 번째 군의관은 돼지의 심장을 붙인 거라 말했죠.
그 여인숙주인이 아가씨(하녀)를 불러 이게 대체 어찌된 일인지 따지려고 부르려는 찰나 그년 벌써 그들이 오는 것을 보곤 뒷문을 통해 도망쳐 다신 돌아오지 않았지요.
그래서 세 명은 주인보고 큰돈을 대신 내라 말했고, 그러지 않음 이 집에 불을 놓겠다 말했지요.
주인은 자신이 가진 것과 구할 수 있는 건 죄다 그들에게 주었어요.
세 명은 그 돈을 받아 도망쳤지요.
그 돈은 세 명이 남은 생을 편히 살기에 충분한 돈이었어요.
하지만 그럼에도 불구하고 그들은 그 돈보다 차라리 자신들의 본래 ‘장기’(손. 심장. 눈)가 더 갖고 싶었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「세 군의관」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「세 군의관」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter118.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



119. 일곱 명의 슈바벤 사람



일곱 명의 ‘슈바벤’(옛날 독일 남부에 있던 공국. 공국=‘공’이라 칭하는 군주가 통치하던 작은 나라) 사람이 의기투합해 모였답니다.
첫 번째는 슐츠 씨였고요, 두 번째는 야클리, 세 번째는 마를리, 네 번째는 예글리, 다섯 번째는 미첼, 여섯 번째는 한스, 일곱 번째는 파이틀리 였지요.
이렇게 일곱 명이 모여 의기투합한 다음 세상을 여행하며 모험을 찾아보기로 하고 위대한 구상(생각)을 실행에 옮겼답니다.
하지만 혹시 모를 안전을 위해 무장을 하고 가기로 했지요. 
맨손으로 시작하는 거보단 그래도 긴 창으로 무장하고서 가는 게 좋겠단 생각이 들었거든요.
일곱 명이 그렇게 긴 창을 손에 쥐고서 모였어요.
맨 앞엔 가장 용감무쌍한 자가 나서기로 하고 슐츠 씨가 다첨이 되었지요. 나머지 사람들은 줄을 지어 그를 뒤따랐답니다. 맨 뒤엔 파이틀리 가 따랐지요.
건초가 자라는 7월에 그렇게 하루를 그들은 멀리 걸었어요, 하지만 아무리 걸어도 하룻밤을 묵기로 애초 정한 마을이 나오지 않는 거예요. 그러다 땅거미가 깔릴 무렵 어느 풀밭에 막 들어서는데 큰 딱정벌레인지 아님 말벌인지 한 마리가 수풀 뒤에서 튀어나와 슝 하고 옆을 지나가며 윙윙 위협적인 소리를 남기지 뭐예요.
맨 앞에 있던 슐츠 씨는 화들짝 놀라 하마터면 생명과도 같은 창을 떨어뜨릴 뻔했어요. 
등골이 오싹한 가운데 그가 온 힘으로 소리쳤지요.
“들어봐! 들어보라고!”라며 그가 동료들을 향해 소리쳤어요.
“오 맙소사! 북소리가 들려.”라며 그 뒤에 창을 들고 서 있던 야클리 가 뭔가 낌새를 채고 말했어요. “확실히 뭔가가 있어, 화약 냄새와 성냥 냄새가 나거든.”
그 소리에 슐츠 씨가 손살 같이 도망치기 시작해 순식간에 산울타리를 넘다 그만 농부가 건초를 거두고 놓고 간 ‘갈퀴’(포크 같이 생긴 거)의 뾰족한 부분을 밟고 말았어요. 순간 갈퀴의 막대기 부분이 사정없이 솟구치며 그의 얼굴을 한 방 쾅 하고 때려버렸지요.
“어이구! 나 죽네!”라며 슐츠 씨가 비명을 질렀어요. “항복! 항복할 테니! 그냥 나를 잡아가라고!”
다른 여섯 명도 덩달아 납작 엎드리며 소리쳤어요.
“당신이 항복하겠다면, 나도 항복이오! 너가 항복하면, 나도 항복!”
결국, 그들을 묶고 데려갈 어떠한 적도 나타나지 않아서 그제야 그들은 자신들이 착각했음을 알게 되었어요. 하지만 이 사실이 알려지면 바보로 놀림을 받을 수 있기에, 서로 이 불시의 사고에 대해선 죽을 때까지 한 마디도 하지 않기로 단단히 약속했죠.
그런 다음 그들이 다시 여행길에 올랐어요.
그들에게 닫친 두 번째 위협은 첫 번째와는 비교조차 할 수 없을 정도였지요.
며칠 후 그들이 ‘노는 땅’(휴한지. 지력을 높이기 위해 잠시 농사를 안 하고 비워둔 땅)에 막 들어서는데, 산토끼 한 마리가 내리쬐는 햇살에 드러누워 자고 있지 않겠어요.
산토끼는 귀를 쫑긋 세우고 생기 없는 두 눈을 환히 뜨고서 자고 있었죠.
이 끔찍한 야생동물의 몰골에 그들은 기겁을 하고서 이 위험에서 빠져나갈 수 있는 방법이 뭔지 상의하기 시작했죠.
왜냐면 이런 괴물에게서 한부로 도망치다간, 괴물이 냉큼 달려와 그들이 날름날름 집어삼킬 수 있었기 때문이지요.
그래서 그들이 말했어요.
“이 위험에서 살아남기 위해선, 대담하게 돌진하는 게 반은 이기는 거라고.”
그리하여 일곱 명 모두가 다시 한 번 창을 꼬나들었고, 슐츠 씨가 맨 앞에 서고, 파이틀리 가 맨 뒤에 따랐어요. 
슐츠 씨가 창을 안 던지고 머뭇거리자 맨 뒤에 서 있던 파이틀리 는 뒤에 있는 게 용기가 나서 더 매몰차게 돌진하자며 외쳤어요.
“모든 ‘슈바벤’(독일 남부의 공국이름) 사람들의 이름으로, 한 방 날리라고, 안 그랬다간 내가 당신 다리몽둥이를 분질러 버릴 테야.”
하지만 이런 상황이 익숙한 한스(여섯 번째 서 있는 사람)가 말했어요.
“동에 번쩍 서에 번적, 고 놈의 주둥이만 살아가지고, 뱀 잡으러 갈 때 맨 꼴찌였으면서.”
미첼(다섯 번째에 서 있는 사람)이 소리쳤어요.
“뭘 바래, 머리털도 안 보이냐, 악마가 거기 서 있잖아.”
그러자 예글리(네 번째에 서 있는 사람)도 한 마디 거들 차례가 되자 말했어요.
“그게 아니라면, 적어도 그의 엄마거나, 그것도 아니라면 악마의 배다른 형제다.”
이리되자 마를리(세 번째로 서 있는 사람)가 번쩍 생각난 게 있어 ‘파이틀리’(맨 뒤 일곱 번째에 서 있는 사람)로보고 말했어요.
“앞장서, 파이틀리, 앞장서, 앞장서라고, 내가 뒤를 든든히 받쳐줄 테니.”
하지만 파이틀리(맨 뒤에 서 있는 사람)가 이게 꿈쩍도 하지 않자, 야클리(두 번째로 서 있는 사람)가 말했어요.
“맨 앞자리는 슐츠 씨의 몫이야, 누구도 그의 명예에 범접할 수 없어.”
그러자 슐츠 씨가 힘이 나 용맹하게 말했어요.
“그럼 우리 다 같이 전진해보세, 우리의 용맹함과 힘을 보여주자고.”
이 결과로서 그들이 다 같이 그 용을 기습했지요.
슐츠 씨는 ‘성호’(손으로 십자가 긋기)를 그으며 하느님께 도와 달라 기도드렸지요.
하지만 이 모두는 정말 쓸 때 없었지요.
그가 적에게 점점 더 가까이 감에 따라 자기도 모르게 “야아! 야아! 야! 야! 야!”라며 괴로워서 울부짖는 비명을 내지르고 말았거든요.
이 바람에 그 산토끼가 잠에서 깨더니 황급히 달아나버렸어요.
그게 싸움터에서 줄행랑을 치는 걸 본 슐츠 씨가 기쁨에 겨워 소리쳤어요.
“빨리, 파이틀리(맨 뒤에 서 있던 사람), 빨리, 저거 좀 봐, 저거 좀 보라고, 괴물이 아니라 그냥 산토끼였어!”
하지만 ‘슈바벤’(독일 남부의 옛 공국이름) 사람들의 모험은 계속되었어요.
그들은 이제 이끼가 자욱하고 고요하고 깊은 강인 ‘모젤 강’(독일과 접하는 프랑스 지역에 있는 강 이름)에 도착했어요. 거기엔 다리가 없어도 너무 없었지요. 그래서 많은 곳들에 보트로 건너는 장소들이 있었죠.
하지만 일곱 슈바벤 사람들이 이걸 알 턱이 없었죠. 그래서 그들은 강 맞은편에서 작업하고 있던 어느 남자를 불러 강을 건너려면 어찌해야하느냐고 물었어요.
거리도 멀고 게다가 그 남자가 이해할 수 없는 사투리로 슈바벤 사람들이 외치는 바람에, 그 남자가 “뭐요? 뭐라고요?”라고 말했어요. 이 사람도 사투리를 사용했는데 이건 근처 ‘트리어’(모젤 강 중간에 있는 도시이름. 지금은 프랑스 땅임) 지방의 사투리였죠.
그러니 슐츠 씨가 그 남자의 말을 “걸어서 건너요, 걸어서 강을 건너시면 돼요.”라고 이해했던 거죠. 그리하여 슐츠 씨가 첫 번째로 출발을 시작해 모젤 강으로 걸어 들어갔답니다.
그가 진흙 속에 가라앉는 순간 높은 파도가 그를 휘몰아 낚아채 간 건 거리 오래 걸리지 않았어요. 그 바람에 그의 모자만이 외롭게 바람에 날려 맞은편 강기슭에 가 앉았죠. 때마침 그 모자 옆에 앉아 있던 개구리 한 마리가 “개굴, 개굴, 개굴”하고 울었죠. 
그러자 맞은편에서 대기하고 있던 여섯 사람들이 이 소리를 듣곤 말했어요.
“오호, 친구들, 슐츠 씨가 우리를 부르고 있네. 그도 걸어서 건널 수 있었음 우리라고 못 건널 게 뭬 잇나?”
그래서 그들 모두가 풍덩하고 시급하게 강물 속으로 뛰어들었다, 그만 물에 빠져 죽고 말았답니다.
개구리 한 마리가 쓸 때 없이 우는 바람에 멀쩡한 사람 목숨 여섯이 저 세상으로 가버린 거지요.
이리하여 ‘슈바벤’(독일 남부에 있던 옛 공국이름) 사람 어느 누구도 두 번 다시 집에 돌아가지 못했답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「일곱 명의 슈바벤 사람」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「일곱 명의 슈바벤 사람」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter119.html

다만 위의 영어동화 속에 나오는 독일사람 이름과 독일지명만은 독일어원문 대로 해석했습니다. (맞는지는 잘 모르겠네요. 미안~)
독일어원문(1819년) 링크 ▶ https://de.wikisource.org/wiki/Die_sieben_Schwaben_(1819)  

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



120. 세 직공



옛날에 세 직공이 있었어요. 그들은 함께 여행하는 동안 같이 지냈고 항상 같은 도시에서 일자리도 구했지요.
하지만 한 번은 그들의 고용주들이 아무것도 주지 않아 그들은 결국 빈털터리가 되어 살길이 막막해졌어요.
그들 중 한 명이 말했어요.
“이제 어쩌지? 여기 더 머물 순 없어, 그러니 다시 한 번 여행을 떠나자, 도시로 가서 일자리를 구해보자, 거기 여인숙 주인을 통해 우리 각자가 어디서 머무는지 편지를 항상 주고받을 수 있을 거잖아, 그럼 일자리도 각자 구해도 되고 말이야.”
그 말에 다른 두 직공들도 동의했어요.
그들이 길을 나섰는데, 가는 도중에 엄청 부자 옷차림을 한 어떤 남성이 그들에게 묻는 거예요.
“자네들은 누군가?”
“저희들은 일자리를 찾고 있는 직공들입니다. 지금껏 쭉 함께 지내오다 더는 안 될 거 같아서 각자 일자리를 구하러 도시로 가는 길이에요.”
“그럴 필요 없네,”라며 그 사내가 말했어요. “내 말대로만 한다면, 자네들은 금화며 일자리며 원하는 대로 얻을 걸세, 그럼 위대한 왕들이 되어 마차도 타고 다닐 수 있지!”
직공들 중 한 명이 말했어요.
“저희들의 영혼과 구원을 해치는 것만 아니면 기꺼이 하지요.”
“그건 아니네,”라며 그 사내가 말했어요. “난 자네들이 목적이 아니네.”
하지만 다른 두 직공들 중 한 명이 그 사내의 발을 바라보니 말의 발과 사람의 발이 보이지 뭐예요, 그리하여 그 사내의 정체(악마)는 뻔 할 뻔 자였죠.
하지만 악마는 말했어요.
“편히 생각하게나, 난 자네들이 목적이 아니니까 말이야, 난 그냥 내가 이미 반쯤 차지한 어떤 다른 영혼 하나를 돛을 활짝 펴고 데려가는 게 목적이라네.”
그렇게 안심을 받은 다음에야 직공들이 동의를 해주었지요.
그래서 악마는 직공들에게 바라는 바를 말해주었어요.
“첫 번째 직공은 모든 질문에 무조건 이리 답해야하네. ‘우리 셋 다.’라고. 두 번째 직공은 ‘돈을 위해.’라고 답해야 하고, 세 번째 직공은, ‘암, 그렇고말고!’라고 답해야하네.”
직공들은 차례대로 그렇게만 말해야 했어요. 항상 말이죠.
만에 하나 다른 얘기를 하거나 순서를 바꿔 답했다가는 그들의 모든 돈이 순식간에 사라질 거라고 했지요, 하지만 그들이 따르는 한은 그들 호주머니들이 언제나 가득 찰 거라고 했어요.
우선, 악마는 직공들이게 직공들이 들고 갈 수 있는 만큼 금화를 주었어요. 그리고 도시에 가면 이러이러한 여관에 꼭 묵어야한다고도 말해주었지요.
직공들이 거기로 하니 여인숙주인이 나와 맞이하며 “드실 것도 그릴까?”라고 물었어요. 
첫 번째 직공이 대답했어요.
“우리 셋 다.”
“그렇겠지요,”라며 주인장이 말했어요. “그걸 물은 거니까.”
두 번째 직공이 말했어요.
“돈을 위해.”
“그야 물론이지.”라며 주인장이 말했어요.
세 번째 직공이 말했어요.
“암, 그렇고말고!”
“옳거니.”라며 주인장이 말했어요.
좋은 고기와 음료수가 직공들에게 나왔어요, 직공들은 그나하게 먹었지요.
저녁식사 후 요금을 치를 때가 되자, 여인숙주인이 계산서를 내밀자, 첫 번째 직공이 “저희 셋 다”라고 말했고, 두 번째 직공이 “돈을 위해”라고 말했고, 세 번째 직공은 “암, 그렇고말고!”라고 대답했어요.
“지당하신 말씀,”라며 주인장이 말했어요. “세 사람 다, 공짜 식사란 없는 법인가.”
그리하여 주인장은 응당 음식 값보다 훨씬 더 비싼 요금을 세 직공들에게 메겨 받아버렸답니다.
이 멍청한 광경을 지켜보고 있던 숙박객들이 말했어요.
“미치지 않고서야.”
“하긴, 저들이 좀,”라며 주인장이 말했어요. “아주 현명하지 않은 건 분명하지.”
그리하여 세 직공들은 그 여관에 머물며 다음과 같은 말밖엔 하지 않았답니다.
“우리 셋 다.”
“돈을 위해.”
그리고 “암, 그렇고말고!”
하지만 여인숙에서 벌어지는 것들을 모두 보고 들었지요.
마침 그때 큰 상인 한 명이 엄청난 돈을 들고 와서 말했어요.
“이보게 주인장 양반, 이 돈 좀 맡김세. 저기 저 얼빠진 직공들이 내 돈을 훔쳐가지 못하게 말이네.”
주인장은 그의 요구대로 맡았어요.
주인장은 돈 가방을 자기 방으로 들고 갔지요, 정말이지 금화가 잔뜩 든 묵직한 가방이었어요. 
그런 까닭에 주인장은 세 직공들에게 아래층 방을 내주고, 그 상인에게는 위층 방을 내주어 별개의 층을 쓰게 했답니다.
밤 12시가 되자, 모두가 잠들었다 생각한 주인장이 자신의 아내와 함께 일어나 도끼를 챙기곤 그 부자 상인의 방으로 가 내리쳐 죽였어요. 살인을 저지른 다음 그들 부부는 다시 자기들 방으로 돌아왔지요.
날이 밝자 큰 소동이 벌어졌어요.
피가 낭자한 상인이 침대에 누워 있었거든요.
모든 손님들이 모여들었을 때, 주인장이 말했어요.
“저 세 미친 직공들이 이 짓을 했소.”
그 말은 할 필요도 없을 정도로, 모든 숙박 객들이 확신하던 바라 말했지요.
“저들 빼곤 이럴 사람이 아무도 없지.”
그리하여 주인장이 세 직공들을 불러 말했어요.
“당신들이 이 상인을 죽였소?”
“우리 셋 다.”라고 첫 번째 직공이 말했어요.
“돈을 위해.”라며 두 번째 직공이 말했어요.
그리고 “암, 그렇고말고!”라며 세 번째 직공이 덧붙였어요.
“여기 계신 여러분들도 직접 들으셨지요,”라며 주인장이 말했어요. “저들이 스스로 자백을 했소이다.”
그리하여 세 직공들은 곧장 감옥에 갇혀 재판을 받게 되었답니다.
그때쯤 되니 그들이 보기에도 상황이 여간 심각한 게 아니라 겁이 너무 나는 거예요, 그런데 악마가 그 날 밤에 와서 말했어요.
“하루만 더 참게들, 자네들의 운이 날아갈 일은 절대 없을 테니, 누구도 자네들 머리카락 한 올도 건드리지 못할 거니 안심들 하게나.”
다음날 아침 세 직공들이 재판정에 끌려나갔어요.
판사가 말했어요.
“당신들이 살인자들이오?”
“우리 셋 다.”
“자네들은 왜 그 상인을 죽였나?”
“돈을 위해.”
“이런 잔인한 자들을 봤나, 자네들은 죄의식도 없는가?”
“암, 그렇고말고!”
“저들이 자백했노라, 그리고 하나같이 누의치지 않고 있다.”라며 판사가 말했어요. “즉각 사형을 집행하라.”
그리하여 세 직공들이 끌려 나갈 때, 그 여인숙 주인장도 구경하려고 그들을 따라 사형장엘 갔더랬죠.
사형 집행인들이 세 직공들을 붙들고 나와, 교수대 위에 위치하고서 시퍼런 칼을 들고 서 있는 목 베는 사람에게 막 건네려는데, 네 마리 짙은 적갈색 말들이 이끄는 마차 한 대가 네 바퀴들에 불꽃을 튀길 정도로 빠르게 달려오며 창문 밖으로 흰 손수건이 내밀며 신호를 주는 거예요.
그러자 목 베는 사람이 말했어요.
“사면(형벌을 면제함)이 내려줬군.”
곧 그 마차에서도 “사면이요! 사면!”라는 외침이 들려왔어요.
그런 다음 악마가 매우 고귀한 신사복 차림으로 그 마차에서 내려오더니 말했어요.
“너희들은 죄가 없다. 자 이제 말을 해도 된다, 너희들이 보고 들은 것을 만천하에 알리거라.”
그러자 첫 번째 직공이 말했어요.
“우린 상인을 죽이지 않았습니다. 살인자는 저기 구경꾼들 틈에 서 있는 바로 저 자요.”
그가 손가락으로 여인숙 주인장을 가리키며 말했어요.
“증거도 제시할 수 있습니다. 그의 지하실에 가보시면, 지금까지 그가 죽여 왔던 수많은 사람들이 목이 매달린 채 걸려 있을 겁니다.”
그런 다음 판사가 사형집행관들을 그리로 보냈어요.
그리고 그들은 직공들이 말한 걸 찾아냈지요.
그들이 판사에게 이를 통보하자, 판사는 그 여인숙 주인장에게 사형을 선고내리고 목을 베어버렸답니다.
그런 다음 악마가 그 세 직공들에게 말했지요.
“이제 내가 바라던 영혼을 얻었으니, 너희들은 자유다 그리고 너희들에게 평생 쓰고도 남을 돈을 주겠다.”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「세 직공」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「세 직공」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter120.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



121. 겁 없는 왕자



옛날에 더는 자기 아빠 집에서 사는 데 더는 만족할 수 없었던 한 왕자가 있었지요. 
그는 정말 겁이 하나도 없는 왕자님이었어요.
그가 생각했지요.
‘세상에 나가봐야지, 길게 느껴지진 않을 거야, 진기한 것들을 많이 볼 테니까.’
그래서 그는 부모님께 작별인사를 드리고 길을 나서 아침부터 밤늦도록 걷고 또 걸었지요. 정말이지 발 길이 향하는 대로 걸었답니다.
그러다 거인이 살고 있는 집을 지나게 되었는데, 때마침 지치기도 하던 터라 그 집 문 앞에 잠시 앉아 쉬었지요.
주변을 둘러보자니, 마당에 놓인 거인의 장난감들이 눈에 들어오지 뭐예요. 
거대한 볼링공 두서너 개와 사람 키만 한 볼링핀(볼링공을 굴려 맞추면 쓰려지는 핀들) 아홉 개가 바로 그것이었지요.
볼링이 급 하고 싶어진 그가 볼링핀들을 세우고 볼링공을 굴려 맞추며 쾌재(통쾌한 외침)를 불렸어요.
이 시끄러운 소리에 거인이 창문 밖으로 고개를 내밀어보았더니 평균 사람 키 보다도 작은 놈 한 명이 자기 마당에서 볼링핀들을 가지고 놀고 있는 게 아니겠어요.
“작은 벌레 같은 놈이,”라며 거인이 소리쳤어요. “왜 남의 볼링공들을 가지고 장난질이래? 누가 너보고 여기서 힘자랑하랬어?”
왕자가 올려다보니 그건 거인이었어요.
왕자가 말했어요.
“오, 멍텅구리, 정말 힘센 팔을 너만 가졌다고 생각하는 건 아니겠지, 난 하고 싶은 건 뭐든 할 수 있다고.”
거인이 내려오더니 왕자의 볼링실력을 크게 감탄하며 지켜봤더랬죠.
그가 말했어요.
“꼬마 아이, 너도 꽤 하는데, 그럼 가서 생명의 나무에 달린 사나 하나만 따와 봐라.”
“그걸로 뭐하게?”라며 왕자가 말했어요.
“나한테 쓰려는 게 아냐,”라며 거인이 대답했어요. “사랑하는 새색시가 달래. 내가 세상을 두루다녀봤지만 그 나무를 찾지 못했어.”
“그렇담 내가 금방 찾지.”라며 왕자가 말했어요. “누구도 내가 사과를 따오는 걸 막을 순 없을 걸.”
거인이 말했어요.
“엄청 쉬운 줄 아는데! 그 나무는 철제 울타리에 둘러싸인 정원에 있어, 그 울타리 앞에는 야수들이 서로 다닥다닥 붙어 있어 누가 얼씬도 못하게 지키고 있단다.”
“나라면 들여보내 줄 거야.”라며 왕자가 말했어요.
“그래, 뭐 어쨌든 네가 정원에 들어서면, 나무에 주렁주렁 달린 그 사과들이 보일 거야, 그렇지만 그게 다가 아냐, 사과 앞에는 고리가 하나씩 달려 있어, 누구든 사과에 손을 가져가는 자의 손모가지를 부러뜨려버리지. 하지만 누구든 거기에 손을 집어넣진 않곤 행운을 딸 순 없단다.”
“그 행운은 내 게 될 거야.”라며 왕자가 말했어요.
왕자는 거인과 작별을 한 다음 쭉 나아가 산과 골짜기를 넘고 평야들과 숲들을 지나 마침내 그 진기한 정원에 도착을 하였답니다.
정말로 그 주변엔 야수들이 지키고 있었는데, 왠지 모두들 고개를 떨구곤 자고만 있었지요.
게다가 그들은 왕자가 지나가도 깨지 않았어요. 그래서 그가 그들을 뛰어넘어 울타리를 타고 올라가 안전하게 정원 안으로 들어갈 수 있었지요.
정원 한 복판에 생명의 나무가 서 있었어요. 탐스럽게 익은 빨간 사과들이 나뭇가지들에 주렁주렁 매달려 있었지요.
그가 나무줄기를 타고 꼭대기까지 기어 올라가 막 사과 하나를 잡으려는데, 그 앞에 고리가 매달려 있지 뭐예요, 그래서 그가 손을 그 속에 아무 어려움 없이 쑥 집ㅈ어 넣어 사과를 쥐었지요.
물론 고리가 그의 팔을 꽉 조이긴 했지만, 별안간 그의 온 혈관들에 신기의 힘이 샘솟는게 느껴졌어요.
사과를 가지고 그가 다시 나무에서 내려와 울타리를 타 넘는 대신 당당히 정문으로 가 한 두 번 흔들어보았더니 우당탕하는 굉음과 함께 문짝이 나가 떨어지지 뭐예요.
그런 다음 그가 나오자, 그때까지 자고 있던 사자가 벌떡 일어나며 그를 뒤쫓아 따라왔답니다.
하지만 사납다거나 으르렁거리며 뒤쫓아 오는 게 아니라 주인님을 모시기 위해 따라오는 거였어요.
왕자가 약속대로 사과를 거인에게 건네며 말했어요.
“봐, 내가 문제없이 가져 온다 했잖아.”
거인은 자기 바람이 이토록 금방 이루어진 게 기뻐 냉큼 자기 새색시한테 가 그녀가 바라던 그 사과를 받쳤지요.
그녀는 아름답고 영리한 아가씨였어요. 그래서 거인의 팔에 고리가 없는 것을 보고 말했지요.
“당신 팔에 고리를 볼 때까지는, 당신이 정말로 이 사과를 따왔다 믿지 않을 테예요.”
거인이 말했어요.
“집에 가서 금방 가져오기만 하면 돼.”
거인은 힘 약한 녀석에게서 힘으로 쉽게 빼앗을 수 있을 거라 믿었거든요. 만약 왕자가 자진해서 안 주면 말이죠.
그리하여 거인이 고리를 달라고 하는데, 왕자가 거절했어요.
“사과와 함께 그 고리도 있어야한단 말이야.”라며 거인이 말했어요. “만약 네가 선뜻 주지 않겠다면 좋다 나랑 한 판 뜨자(싸우자).”
그들이 한참을 뒤엉켜 레슬링을 했어요.
하지만 거인은 왕자를 이길 수 없었어요. 왜냐면 왕자의 팔에 낀 그 고리가 신비한 마법의 힘이 되어 주어 왕자를 강하게 해주었던 거지요.
도저히 힘으론 안 되겠다 여긴 거인이 전략을 바꿔 말했지요.
“싸웠더니 덥다, 우리 일단 멈추고, 강에 가서 씻고 몸을 식힌 다음 다시 싸우자.”
거기에 뭔 꼼수가 있음을 전혀 눈치 채지 못한 왕자는 강물로 가 옷을 벗고 고리도 팔에서 벗어 놓고 강물로 첨벙 뛰어들었답니다.
거인이 즉시 그 고리를 낚아채 도망쳤어요.
하지만 도둑을 본 사자가 거인을 뒤쫓아 와 그의 손에서 고리를 빼어가 다시 자기 주인에게 돌려주었어요.
그러자 거인은 떡갈나무 뒤에 숨어 있다, 왕자가 다시 옷을 주워 입느라 바쁜 틈을 타 급습(공격)해 왕자 두 눈의 시력을 멀게 해버렸지요.
그리하여 불행에 처한 왕자가 멀거니 서 있는데, 앞이 안 보여 어찌할 바를 몰랐답니다.
그때 거인이 다시 돌아오더니 왕자의 손을 잡고는 마치 도와주려는 것처럼 길을 인도하더니 높은 바위 꼭대기로 끌고 갔어요.
그런 다음 거인은 왕자만 남겨놓고 떠나며 생각했지요.
‘두 발작만 더 가면 저 놈은 굴러 떨어져 죽게 돼 있어, 그럼 난 고리를 주어오면 돼.’
하지만 충직한 사자는 주인을 버리지 않았지요, 사자가 왕자의 옷자락을 붙잡고는 꾸준히 뒤로 끌어당겼어요.
죽은 왕자에게서 고리를 훔치러 온 거인이 보니 자신의 교활한 술수가 헛수고가 된 걸 보게 되었지요.
“어쩔 시구, 저딴 약해빠진 놈 죽일 방법은 많지?”라며 그가 분통을 터뜨리더니 왕자를 잡곤 다시 다른 길로 끌고 갔지요, 하지만 사자는 거인의 나쁜 의도를 대번에 파악하고서 다시 주인을 위험에서 구해주기 위해 달려왔답니다.
거인은 왕자를 낭떠러지로 끌고 온 다음 눈먼 자의 손을 놓아버렸지요, 기인이 왕자를 뒤에서 막 밀치려할 때, 달려온 사자가 거인을 먼저 밀어버려 거인이 땅바닥에 부딪혀 산산조각이 나고 말았어요.
충직한 동물이 절벽에서 다시 주인을 끌고 뒤로 되돌아와 맑은 시냇물이 흐르는 나무 아래에 데려다주었답니다.
왕자가 거기 앉아 있는데, 사자가 드러눕더니 자기 앞발로 시냇물을 왕자의 얼굴에 끼얹었어요.  
그 바람에 물 두 방울이 그의 눈에 닿았는데, 그 즉시 뭔가 조금씩 보이기 시작하는 거예요, 바로 그때 작은 새 한 마리가 바로 옆을 지나가다 나무줄기에 부딪혀 상처를 입고 물에 풍덩 떨어졌는데 물속에서 목욕을 하고 나더니 다시 건강해져선 위로 날아오르며 나무들 사이로 헤치며 날아가는 거예요. 
그래서 시력도 그렇게 회복될 수 있을 거 같단 생각이 든, 왕자가 이것을 하느님이 보낸 가호로 여기고 그 시냇물에 몸을 숙이고는 얼굴을 씻었어요.
그가 다시 허리를 펴고 일어서니 정말 두 눈이 다시 전보다 더 또렷하고 맑게 보이기 시작하지 뭐예요.
왕자는 자신에게 큰 자비를 내려주신 하느님께 감사기도를 드린 다음 자신의 사자와 함께 드넓은 세상 속으로 여행을 떠났답니다.
그러다 우연히 마법에 걸린 어느 성에 도착하게 되었지요.
그 성문에 아름다운 몸매와 앳된 얼굴을 지닌 아가씨 한 분이 서 있는데, 살갗이 온통 까맣지 뭐예요.
그녀가 그에게 말했어요.
“아, 저희를 덮친 이 불행의 악마들로부터 저를 구해주실 분이 오셨군요.”
“제가 어찌하면 되나요?”라며 왕자가 말했어요.
그 아가씨가 대답했어요.
“당신은 이제 마법에 걸린 이 성의 홀(큰 공간)에서 3일 밤을 지내시며 절대 겁을 먹어서는 안 돼요. 저들이 당신을 괴롭히고 온갖 패악 질을 하더라도 입도 뻥긋하시지 말고 꾹 참으셔야 제가 마법에서 풀려나요. 저들이 감히 당신의 생명을 어찌하진 못하니 걱정 마시고요.”
그러자 왕자가 말했어요.
“난 겁이 없소. 하느님께서 도우사 내가 한 번 해보리다.”
그래서 그는 기분 좋게 성으로 들어갔지요. 
날이 저물자 그는 큰 홀에 앉아 기다렸답니다.
모든 게 쥐죽은 듯 조용했어요, 하지만 밤 12시가 되자 우당탕 야단법석이 일더니 온 사방에 난 구멍들과 모서리에서 작은 악마들이 기어 나오기 시작했어요.
그들은 마치 왕자가 보이지 않는 듯 안하무인으로 행동했어요. 방 한 가운데에 저들끼리 앉기도 하고 모닥불을 피우기도 하고 도박도 하기 시작했지요.
그들 중 한 명이 몽땅 잃게 되자 그가 말했어요.
“오늘은 글렀군, 이게 다 우리 족속에 속하지 않는 놈이 저기 앉아 있기 때문이야, 이건 죄다 저 놈 탓인 거야.”
“바로 너 임마, 난로 뒤에 앉아 있는 너 말이야, 내가 가만 두나 봐라.”라며 다른 악마도 말했어요.
곧 큰 소란이 벌어지며 온갖 아우성 소리에 딴 소리는 하나도 안 들리게 되었죠.
그럼에도 왕자는 가만 앉아 있었답니다, 왜긴요 원체 겁이 없었으니까요. 하지만 바닥에서부터 악마들이 솟아나오고 위에서도 떨어지며 왕자를 덮치자 그 수가 원체 많아 아무리 방어를 해도 왕자로서도 속수무책이었죠.
작은 악마들은 왕자를 바닥 여기저기로 끌고 다니고 꼬집고 찌르고 때리고 괴롭히고 별 짓들을 다 했어요.
하지만 왕자는 한 마디 입도 벙끗하지 않았죠.
아침이 다가오자 작은 악마들이 모두 사라졌어요.
왕자도 몹시 지쳐 손가락 하나 까딱할 수 없었답니다.
날이 밝자 그 까만 아가씨가 그에게 왔어요.
그녀는 생명의 물이 담긴 작은 병을 손에 쥐고 와 그 물로 그를 씻어 주었어요. 그러자 그의 고통이 싹 가시고 다시 혈관 속으로 새 힘이 불끈 솟아나며 흐르기 시작했답니다.
그녀가 말했어요.
“하룻밤은 잘 참아내셨어요, 이제 두 밤만 더 지내시면 돼요.”
그런 다음 그녀는 다시 물러났어요. 그녀가 갈 때보니, 그녀의 발이 하얗게 변해 있는 걸 그는 보았답니다.
다음날 밤에도 작은 악마들은 다시 장난질을 하며 난리를 피웠지요.
그들이 왕자를 눕히곤 전날보다 더 심하게 때리는 바람에 왕자의 온 몸이 상처투성이가 되었답니다.
하지만 그는 모든 걸 꾹 참고 견뎠지요. 그래서 작은 악마들도 그를 내버리고 가버리는 수밖에 없었어요, 그만 새벽이 밝아왔기 때문이죠.
아가씨가 다시 와 생명의 물로 그를 치유해주었답니다.
그녀가 갈 때 보니 이제 그녀의 손가락 끝까지 새하얗게 변해있는 게 눈에 들어와 그는 더없이 기뻤답니다.
이제 그는 하룻밤만 더 견뎌내면 되었어요, 하지만 이 셋째 날은 정말이지 최악이지 뭐예요.
개구쟁이 작은 악마들이 다시 기어 나왔어요.
“너 아직도 있었어?”라며 그들이 소리질렀어요. “아주 그냥 숨이 끊어져야 가겠다 이거지.”
그들이 그를 찌르고 때리고 이리저리로 던지고 팔과 다리를 찢어버리려는 듯 잡아 당겼지만, 그는 모든 걸 꾹 참고 견디며 단 한 마디 외침도 뱉지 않았답니다.
마침내 작은 악마들이 다 사라졌어요, 하지만 이번만은 그도 완전히 녹초가 되어 기절한 채 누워 있었죠, 손가락 하나 까딱하지 못하는 수준을 넘어 아가씨와 와도 눈을 뜨지 못할 지경이었죠.
아가씨가 생명의 물을 뿌려주고 그를 씻겨주었어요.
그러자 순식간에 그의 모든 고통들이 싹 가시며 하룻밤 푹 자고 난 듯 그가 건강하고 싱싱하게 두 눈을 번쩍 떴답니다.
그가 보니, 자기 앞에 서 있는 아가씨가 마치 대낮처럼 살결이 새하얘져있지 뭐예요.
“눈을 뜨신 거예요,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “이제 계단 위로 가셔서 당신의 검을 세 번만 휘두르시면 모든 게 마법에서 풀려날 거예요.”
그래서 그가 시킨대로 했더니, 온 성이 마법에서 풀려나지 뭐예요, 그 아가씨는 사실 부유한 공주님이셨답니다.
하인들이 와서 “큰 홀 식탁에 저녁식사를 이미 준비해놓았습니다.”라고 말했어요.
그런 다음 그들은 가 앉아 함께 마시며 음식을 들었죠.
그리고 바로 그날 저녁 모두의 기쁨 속에 그들의 결혼식이 성대하게 거행되었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「겁 없는 왕자」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「겁 없는 왕자」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter121.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



122. 당나귀 양배추



옛날에 잠복하러(사냥하러) 숲으로 향하던 젊은 사냥이 한 명 있었습니다.
그는 마음이 들뜨고 흥겨웠죠. 가는 길에 이파리들이 바스락거렸으니까요, 그런데 그가 가고 있는데 저쪽에서 쭈그렁 할멈 하나가 다가오더니 그에게 말을 걸며 이렇게 말하는 거예요.
“좋은 아침이에요, 친절한 사냥꾼 양반, 진실로 흥겹고 행복해보이네요, 하지만 난 굶주림과 목마름에 고통 받고 있다오, 그래 내게 한 푼만 줄 수 있겠소.”
사냥꾼은 쭈그렁 할멈이 불쌍했습니다. 때마침 자신의 호주머니에 뭔가 있기에 그가 줄 수 있는 만큼 건네주었죠.
그래서 그가 계속 길을 가려는데, 그 노파가 그를 멈춰세우며 말했어요.
“들어봐요, 친절한 사냥꾼 양반, 내 하나 알려드리리다. 당신이 너무도 친절하여 보답을 하지 않고는 못 배기겠거든. 이 길로 쭉 가면 멀리 못가 나무가 하나 나올 게요, 그 나무에 지금 아홉 마리 새들이 망토(외투) 하나를 발톱으로 움켜잡곤 서로 자기 꺼라 싸우고 있다오, 그러니 당신은 총을 꺼내 그들 한 가운데를 쏘시구려, 그럼 새들도 망토를 당신 쪽으로 떨어뜨리고 말거요, 게다가 새 한 마리도 상처를 입고 떨어져 죽을 텐데. 당신은 얼른 그 망토를 챙기시구려. 그건 요술 망토거근. 당신이 그걸 어깨에 둘러매고 가보고 싶은 특정 장소만 말하면 눈 깜빡할 사이에 그곳에 가 있을 게요. 그리고 죽은 새의 심장을 꺼내 한입에 삼키시구려, 그럼 매일 아침마다 당신이 일어났을 때 당신 베개 밑에 금화 한 닢씩이 나올 게요.”
사냥꾼은 그 여자 주술사에게 고맙다는 인사를 드리곤, 속으로 생각했지요.
‘정말 그녀가 말한 대로라면 그 참 기똥차겠는걸.’
그런데 그녀의 말은 정말이었어요, 그가 채 백 발자국도 못 갔는데, 머리 위 나뭇가지들 사이에서 짹짹거리며 다투는 비명소리들이 들려 올려다보니 한 무리의 새들이 정말로 부리(입)와 발톱들로 망토 하나를 찢어가지려 끌어당기고 싸우며 서로 가리려하고 있지 뭐예요.
“어,”라며 사냥꾼이 말했어요. “그 말이 참말이었네. 모든 게 그 수다스런 노파가 예견한대로야!”
그래서 그가 총을 어깨춤에서 풀어 조준을 한 다음 새들 한 가운데를 쏘자, 깃털들이 사방에 날리며 흩어졌지요.
새들은 즉시 비명을 지르며 날아올랐는데, 한 마리가 떨어져 죽었어요, 동시에 망토도 땅위로 떨어졌지요.
이후는 여자 주술사가 말한 대로 사냥꾼은 행동했어요. 새를 잘라 열고는 심장을 찾아내 꿀꺽 삼켜버리고 망토는 잘 챙겨 집으로 돌아왔지요.
다음날 아침 그가 잠에서 깨보니 약속이 실현돼있지 뭐예요, 설마 진짜겠어 하는 마음에 살펴보려고 자신의 베개를 들어보았더니 정말 금화 한 닢이 반짝하고 빛나고 있는 거예요, 그 다음날도 금화 한 닢은 있었고요, 그 다음 날도, 또 그 다음 날도 계속해서 매일 금화가 한 닢씩 나왔답니다.
그는 한 무더기의 금화를 모았답니다.
그러다보니 결국 이런 생각이 들었지요.
‘얼씨구 집에만 있는데 이 많은 금화가 다 뭔 소용이겠어? 아무래도 세상 밖으로 나가봐야겠다.’
그런 다음 그는 부모님께 작별인사를 드리고 배낭과 총을 챙겨 세상으로 나갔어요.
그러다 하루는 울창한 숲속으로 여행하게 되었고 끝까지 쭉 가보니 평지에 화려한 성 한 채가 서 있지 뭐예요.
그 성의 창문들 중 하나에선 노파가 눈부시도록 아름다운 아가씨와 함께 서서 밖을 내다보고 있던 찰나였어요.
하지만 노파는 마녀였지요. 
그녀가 아가씨에게 말했어요.
“저기 숲에서 오고 있는 자의 몸속엔 경이로운 보물이 들어있다, 우리는 그걸 저 자에게서 빼앗아야해, 알겠니, 내 사랑하는 딸애야, 그건 저 자보다 우리에게 더 어울리거든. 그는 새의 심장을 삼켰지. 그건 매일 아침 베게아래에 금화가 한 닢씩 나오는 보물이다.”
그녀는 아가씨보고 어찌하면 그걸 얻을 수 있는지 그리고 이제부터 어떤 역할을 맡아 연기해야하는지 알려주었어요, 최종적으로는 아가씨를 위협하며 이글거리는 눈초리로 말했지요.
“내가 시킨 대로 하지 않음, 큰일 당할 줄 알거라.”
가까이 다가온 사냥꾼이 그 처녀를 발견하곤 생각했어요.
‘그동안 수도 없이 돌아다녔다, 이제 이 아름다운 성에 들어가 휴식을 취하자, 돈이야 두둑하니까.’
그렇지만 진짜 이유는 이 아름다운 아가씨에게 홀딱 반했기 때문이었지요.
그가 집에 들어서니 아가씨가 반갑고 호의적으로 맞이해주었어요.
머지않아 사냥꾼은 이 젊은 마녀를 진짜 사랑하게 되어, 오매불망 그녀 생각뿐이라 그녀가 보는 것만 자신도 보고 싶었고, 그녀가 바라는 것만 해주고 싶었죠.
그때 노파가 말했어요.
“이제 새의 심장을 얻을 차례다, 실수 없도록.”
노파는 마실 걸 준비했어요, 준비가 다 되자 그걸 컵에 쏟아 붓곤 아가씨에게 건네며 사냥꾼에게 주라고 말했지요.
아가씨가 시킨 대로 했어요.
“자기, 자, 마셔요.”
그는 멋도 모르고 컵을 건네받아 마셨다가 새의 심장을 토해내고 말았지요.
아가씨가 그걸 몰래 주어 자신이 삼켜버렸어요. 왜냐면 노파가 그렇게 시켰거든요.
그때부터 사냥꾼은 더는 자기 베개 밑에서 금화를 발견할 수 없었답니다.
대신 그 금화는 처녀의 배게 밑에서 발견되었지요. 그럼 노파가 매일 아침 와서 가져갔지요.
하지만 사냥꾼은 지금 자신의 연인에게 홀딱 반해있던 터라 아가씨 외에는 어떤 것도 챙길 겨를이 없었어요.
그때 늙은 마녀가 말했어요.
“우리가 새의 심장을 가졌지만, 아직 요술 망토까지 그에게서 빼앗은 건 아니다.”
아가씨가 대답했어요.
“그건 그냥 그에게 주면 안돼요, 그 이는 재산을 다 잃었잖아요.”
노파가 벌컥 화를 내며 말했어요.
“그 망토가 어떤 망토인줄 알고 그딴 소리냐, 세상 어디든 갈 수 있는 망토란 말이다. 난 그걸 꼭 손에 쥐어야겠어!”
노파는 아가씨의 뺨을 몇 차례 때리며 자기 말을 듣지 않음 큰 일 날 줄 알라며 다그쳤어요.
그래서 아가씨는 노파가 시킨 대로 해야 했어요. 
그녀는 창가로 가 먼 나라 쪽을 바라보았죠, 마치 우수(슬픔)에 젖은 듯 말이에요.
사냥꾼이 물었어요.
“그렇게 슬픈 눈을 하고서 서 있는 게요?”
“아, 자기,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “저 너머에 있다는 석류석(보석) 산이요, 거기엔 보석들이 자란데요. 그래서 가보고 싶다는 생각을 하느라 그만 슬퍼보였다 보네요, 하지만 누가 갈 수 있겠어요? 새들이나 갈 수 있을까, 거기까지 날아가면 되니까요, 하지만 인간에겐 무리죠.”
“그거뿐이오?”라며 사냥꾼이 말했어요. “내 당신의 슬픔을 씻어내 주리다.”
그가 자신의 망토로 그녀를 감싸 안더니 “석류석 산으로 가 줘”라며 소원을 빌자, 눈 깜짝할 사이에 그들이 석류석 산에 같이 앉아 있는 게 아니겠어요.
사방에서 방실방실 그들을 맞이하는 웃음을 지어보이며 보석들이 반짝이고 있었어요. 
그들은 함께 가장 아름답고 귀중한 것들만 모았답니다.
그때 노파가 자신의 마법으로 사냥꾼의 눈꺼풀을 무겁게 만들었어요.
그가 처녀에게 말했어요.
“우리 잠시 여기서 눈 좀 붙이고 가지. 내가 지금 너무 피곤해서 서 있을 수가 없구려.”
그때 그들이 앉았고, 그는 자신의 머리를 그녀의 무릎에 얹고 깊은 잠에 빠져들었죠.
그가 자고 있는 동안, 아가씨는 그의 어깨에 있던 망토를 벗겨 자신의 몸을 감싸고는 주운 석류석(보석)과 보석들을 챙겨 “이젠 집으로 데려다 줘”라고 소원을 빌었어요.
하지만 아무것도 모르는 사냥꾼은 잠에서 깨어나고서야 아무도 없는 것을 보고 자신의 연인이 자기를 배신했음을 인식하게 되었지요. 그 혼자만 거친 산에 남겨두고 갔으니까요.
그가 말했어요.
”오, 세상에 이럴 수가!“
그는 어찌할지를 몰라 하며 상심과 슬픔에 빠져 거기 앉아 있었어요.
하지만 그 산은 몇몇 사납고 무자비한 거인들이 살아가는 곳이었어요.
사냥꾼이 오래 앉아 있지도 않았는데 벌써 저기서 세 거인들이 다가오고 있는 게 보였어요. 그래서 사냥꾼은 자신이 깊은 잠에 곯아떨어진 척 드러누웠답니다.
그때 거인들이 다가왔어요. 첫 번째 거인이 자신의 발로 밟아 죽이려했어요. 
그 거인이 말했지요.
“뭔 땅벌레 같은 게 동그랗게 말아서 누워있담?”
두 번째 거인이 말했어요.
“그냥 밟아서 죽여 버려.”
그러자 세 번째 거인이 말했어요.
“뭐 그딴 것에 힘을 써. 그냥 내버려둬, 여기 더는 있을 수 없을 테니. 그 참 위로 더 올라가 산 정상에 가보면 구름들이 모여들며 바람 부는 대로 어디든 데려다 줄 텐데 말이야.”
그 말을 남기곤 그들은 그냥 지나가버렸어요.
하지만 사냥꾼은 그들의 말을 열심히 듣고 있었답니다. 거인들이 사라지자마자 그는 곧바로 일어나 산 정상으로 기어 올라갔지요.
그가 거기에 잠시 앉아 있으니, 정말 구름 하나가 그 쪽으로 오더니 그를 태우곤 둥실둥실 흘러가는 거예요, 그는 하늘속에서 한동안 그렇게 여행을 했더랬죠.
그땐 구름이 차츰 내려가더니 그를 거대한 양배추 밭에 내려놓아주었어요. 사방으로 벽들이 둘러서 있는 밭이었지요. 그 바람에 밭에선 양배추들과 야채들이 안전하게 자라고 있었답니다.
사냥꾼은 주변을 둘러보며 말했어요.
“일단 너무 배가 고파서 뭐 좀 먹고 봐야겠는걸! 어차피 시간 지나도 굶을 거, 그런데 젠장 주변에 사과나무도 배나무도 그리고 어떤 다른 과일 나무도 안 보이네. 온통 이 양배추들뿐이야.”
하지만 마침내는 그도 생각했지요.
 “급한 대로 이 양배추 이파리라도 몇 개 먹어야겠어, 특별한 맛이야 없겠지만 상쾌하겐 해줄 거야.”
그가 그중 가장 좋은 양배추 머리를 집어 들고 먹었어요. 그가 그렇게 두서너 번 꿀꺽꿀꺽 집어먹자마자 그는 점점 자신이 낯설고 아주 이상해지는 걸 느꼈어요.
세상에 네 다리가 자라 있지 뭐예요, 그리고 거대해진 머리며 두꺼운 두 귀며, 이제 영락없는 당나귀의 모습으로 변해있는 자신을 보고 그는 화들짝 놀라고 말았어요.
하지만 여전히 배가 더 고팠기에, 다시 먹기 시작하는데, 이번엔 본능적으로 좀 더 달콤한 다른 종류의 양배추를 먹어봤어요. 그가 꿀꺽 삼키자마자 그가 다시 원래의 모습으로 돌아오며 나중엔 완전히 인간의 모습을 되찾았지요.
그런 다음 너무도 피곤하던 사냥꾼이 드러누워 잠이 들었어요.
다음날 아침에 깬 그가 나쁜 양배추와 착한 양배추 머리를 하나씩 뽑았어요.
그가 속으로 생각했어요.
‘이게 내 것들을 되찾는데 도움이 될 거야, 그리고 천벌을 내리는 데에요.“
그런 다음 그는 양배추들을 가지고 벽에 기어올라 넘은 다음 연인이 있는 성으로 나아갔어요.
2~3일을 방황한 끝에 운 좋게도 그는 성을 다시 찾는데 성공했지요.
그는 자신의 얼굴을 갈색으로 칠했어요, 그래야 그녀의 늙은 엄마가 자신을 못 알아볼 거 아니에요, 그는 가서 숙박을 부탁했어요.
“너무 노곤해서요,”라며 그가 말했어요. “더는 갈 수 없네요.”
마녀가 물었어요.
“그래, 손님, 당신은 누구시오, 그리고 직업은 무엇이오?” 
“저는 왕의 전령(심부름꾼)입니다. 지금 따사로운 햇살을 받고 자란 맛있는 샐러드는 구해 돌아가고 있는 중입니다. 왕의 심부름을 받았거든요. 운이 좋게도 목적한 바를 구할 수 있었죠. 하지만 태양 볕이 너무 강하다보니 연약한 양배추가 다 시들까 걱정입니다, 이런 식이라면 더는 못 가져가는데.”
늙은 여자는 맛난 샐러드란 소리를 듣고 군침을 돋우며 말했어요.
“시골양반, 내 한 입만 먹어봅시다, 그 굉장하다는 샐러드를 말이오.”
“왜 안 되겠습니까?”라며 그가 대답했어요. “두 개를 가지고 있으니 내 당신께 하나를 선뜻 드리리다.”
그가 자신의 배낭을 열어 나쁜 양배추를 그녀에게 건네주었어요.
마녀는 전혀 눈치 채지 못했죠. 
그걸로 맛난 요리를 해먹을 생각을 하니 군침이 돌지 뭐예요, 그래서 그녀가 부엌으로 가져가 그 양배추를 조리하기 위하여 대강 준비를 하였죠.
그런데 너무도 먹고 싶어 요리 할 동안 참질 못한 나머지 이파리 몇 개만 집어 입에 꿀꺽 넣어버렸지요. 그녀가 삼키자마자 원래 인간의 모습이던 게 점 사라지더니 급기야 그녀가 당나귀로 변해 마당으로 뛰어나가고 말았답니다.
이내 곧 하녀가 부엌에 들어와 준비가 다된 그 샐러드를 가져나갔지요, 그러다 접시를 들고 가는 도중 늘 습관대로 얼마나 맛있는지 보려고 이파리 몇 개만 집어서 먹어보았지요.
그 즉시 마법의 힘이 그녀를 덮쳐 그녀 또한 당나귀로 변해 노파에게 달려 나가고 말았고, 샐러드 접시는 땅바닥에 너부러지고 말았죠.
한편 ‘전령’(왕의 심부름꾼으로 변장한 사냥꾼)은 아름다운 아가씨 옆에 앉아 있었어요. 
그런데 아무도 그 샐러드는 가지고 돌아오지 않자 그녀가 먹고 싶은지 말했어요.
“아직 샐러드 요리가 다 안 됐나.”
사냥꾼은 생각했어요.
‘그 샐러드가 벌써 효력을 발휘한 모양이야.’
그래서 그가 말했지요.
“제가 부엌으로 가서 알아보고 오겠습니다.”
그가 내려가 보니 안마당에서 당나귀 두 마리가 뛰어다니고 있었어요.
하지만 샐러드는 바닥위에 너부러져 있었죠.
“옳거니,”라며 그가 말했어요. “이파리 두 개는 이미 먹었군.”
그가 나머지 이파리들을 주워 접시에 도로 담은 다음 아가씨에게 가져다주었어요.
“이 맛있는 샐러드 요리를 당신께 가져왔습니다.”라고 그가 말했어요. “기다리실 거 같아서 말이죠.”
그런 다음 그녀가 먹었죠. 그러자 다른 사람들처럼 그녀도 본래 인간의 모습을 잃고 당나귀로 변해 안마당으로 뛰어나갔어요.
사냥꾼이 자신의 얼굴을 씻고 나자, 당나귀로 변한 자들이 그를 알아보았어요.
그는 안마당으로 내려와 말했지요.
“자 이제 너희들의 응보에 맞는 벌을 받아야지.”
그러면서 그는 그들 셋을 하나의 끈에 메고 방앗간으로 몰고 갔어요.
그가 창문을 두드리자, 방앗간 주인이 고개를 내밀며 “무슨 일이슈?”라고 물었어요.
“말 안 듣는 짐승 세 마리가 있는데,”라며 사냥꾼이 말했어요. “더는 못 키우겠어서 말이오. 당신이 거두어주시구려. 이들 짐승에게 먹이와 가축우리를 주시오. 다만 제 말대로 이들을 다루시겠다고만 약속해주시오. 내가 바라는 건 그것뿐이오.”
방앗간 주인이 말했어요.
“그거야 뭐? 그래 어떻게 다뤄주면 되오?”
그러자 사냥꾼이 말했어요.
“나이 많은 이 당나귀에게는 세 대의 매와 한 끼의 식사를 주시오.”
그건 마녀가 변신한 당나귀였어요. 
“젊은 이 당나귀에게는 한 대의 매와 세 끼의 식사를 주시오.”
그건 하녀가 변신한 당나귀였어요.
“그리고 가장 어린 이 당나귀는 때리지는 마시고, 세 끼의 식사만 주시구려.”
왜냐면 사냥꾼도 아가씨가 맞는 것을 바라진 않았거든요.
그 후 사냥꾼은 성으로 돌아왔지요, 거기에 필요한 게 다 있었으니까요.
2~3일 후 그 방앗간 주인이 찾아와 “하루에 세 대씩 매를 맞고 한 끼의 식사만 하던 나이 많은 당나귀가 죽었습니다요.”라고 알려왔어요.
“다른 두 마리는,”라며 방앗간 주인이 계속 말했어요. “하루에 세 끼를 먹으니 죽을 거 같진 않은데, 암만해도 슬퍼 보이는 게 오래 살지는 못할 거 같더군요.”
사냥꾼은 덜컥 불쌍한 마음이 들며 노여움이 싹 가시는 걸 느꼈어요.
사냥꾼이 방앗간 주인에게 “그들을 다시 데려와주시오.”라고 말했어요.
그들이 도착하자, 사냥꾼은 그들에게 착한 양배추를 조금씩 먹였어요. 그래서 그들이 원래 사람의 모습으로 돌아오게 되었지요.
아름다운 아가씨가 그의 앞에 무릎을 꿇고 앉으며 말했어요.
“아아, 연인이시어, 제가 당신께 한 죄를 용서해주세요. 제 엄마가 강요해 저도 어쩔 수 없었어요. 그건 제 뜻이 아니었답니다. 전 당신을 너무도 사랑하니까요. 당신의 요술 망토는 찬장에 걸려 있어요. 새의 심장은 제가 이제 토하는 약을 마시고 토해내도록 할게요.”
하지만 그의 생각은 달랐어요.
그가 말했어요.
“가지고 계시구려. 이젠 하나 아니오. 이제 곧 당신이 내 진짜 아내가 될 테니 말이오. 우리 결혼합시다.”
그래서 결혼식이 거행되었지요, 그들은 하느님이 부르실 때까지 둘이 알콩달콩 참 행복하게 살았답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「당나귀 양배추」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「당나귀 양배추」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter122.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



123. 숲 속의 노파



가난한 하녀가 한번은 자신이 봉사하는 가족과 함께 여행을 하다 울창한 숲을 통과하게 되었어요.
그런데 숲 한 복판에 다다랐을 때, 강도들이 수풀에서 튀어나와 닫치는 대로 죽이는 거예요.
황급히 마차에서 뛰어내려 나무 뒤에 몸을 숨겼던 소녀만 제외하고 모두가 죽임을 당했지요.
강도들이 약탈품들을 챙겨 가버리자, 소녀가 나왔는데 처참한 광경이 이루 말할 수 없었어요.
그래서 그녀가 몹시 울기 시작하며 말했어요.
“나 같은 소녀가 이제 어쩌라고? 사람 한 명 살지 않는 이 숲을 나가는 방법도 모르는데, 이제 굶어죽을게 확실해.”
그녀가 이리저리 걸으며 길이 있는지 살펴보았지만 있을 턱이 없었어요.
저녁이 되자 그녀가 어느 나무 아래에 주저앉아 하느님께 자신을 보호해 달라 기도를 드리고는 무슨 일이 생기더라도 어디 가지 않고 거기서 기다려보기로 결심을 하였더랬죠.
하지만 그렇게 그녀가 잠시 거기 앉아 있자니, 흰 비둘기 한 마리가 입에 작은 황금 열쇠를 물고서 날아왔어요.
비둘기가 작은 열쇠를 그녀의 손에 내려놓으며 말했어요.
“저 큰 나무를 보세요, 그 안에 작은 자물쇠가 있을 텐데, 이 작은 열쇠로 여시면 돼요, 거기에 당신이 드실만한 음식이 잔득 있으니 더는 배고픔으로 고통 받지 않을 거예요.”
그래서 그녀가 나무로 가 열어보니 예쁜 접시에 담긴 우유가 있고 그 안에 흰 빵도 담가져 있어 배부르도록 먹을 수 있었답니다.
만족한 그녀가 말했어요.
“지금은 암탉들도 잠자리에 들 시간이야, 나도 피곤한데 그만 잤으면.”
그러자 그 비둘기가 부리에 다른 황금 열쇠를 물고서 다시 날아와 말했어요.
“이번엔 저 나무를 열어보세요, 침대가 있을 거예요.”
그래서 그녀가 열어보니 아름다운 흰색 침대가 있었어요.
그녀가 하느님께 자신이 자는 밤 동안 지켜달라 기도를 드리곤 침대에 누워 잠이 들었어요.
아침에 비둘기가 작은 열쇠를 물고서 세 번째로 나라와 말했어요.
“저기 있는 저 나무를 열어보세요, 옷들이 있을 거예요.”
그래서 열어보니 정말 금과 보석들로 장식된, 어느 공주님들의 의상보다 더 화려한 옷들이 있었어요.
그녀는 그리하여 얼마동안 거기서 살았답니다.
비둘기가 매일같이 날아와 그녀가 필요한 것들을 제공해주니 나름 괜찮은 삶이었어요.
하지만 한번은 비둘기가 오더니 말했어요.
“제가 부탁하나만 드려도 될까요?”
“기꺼이.”라며 소녀가 말했어요.
그러자 귀여운 비둘기가 말했어요.
“제가 당신께 작은 집으로 안내해드릴 테니, 그거 들어가 주세요. 들어가시면 화로 옆에 노파가 한 명 앉아 있는데 이렇게 말할 거예요. ‘안녕.’ 그럼 당신은 절대 대답을 해선 안 돼요, 노파가 뭐라 하던 그냥 두시고 그녀 오른쪽 편으로 지나 쭉 가보시면, 문이 하나 나올 텐데, 그걸 여세요. 그럼 모든 종류의 반지들이 잔뜩 놓여 있는 방이 하나 나올 거니 거기로 들어가세요. 그리고 그 반지들 사이에서 빛나는 보석이 가득한 화려한 반지들은 그냥 두시고, 거기서 가장 소박한 반지를 찾으세요. 그게 분명 있을 거예요, 그럼 그걸 집어다 가능한 한 가장 빨리 여기로 가지고 오시면 돼요.”
소녀는 그 작은 집으로 가 문에 도착했어요.
거기 앉아 있던 노파가 그녀를 보곤 깜짝 놀라 말했어요.
“안녕 얘야.”
소녀는 한 마디도 답하지 않고 문을 열었어요.
“저리가지 못해.”라며 노파가 고함치며 그녀의 가운(웃옷)을 잡고 더는 못 가게 하려고 하며 말했어요. “여긴 내 집이야. 아무도 내 허락 없인 못 들어가.”
하지만 소녀는 아무 말 없이 그녀에게서 도망쳐 곧장 방으로 들어갔어요.
거기 탁자 위에 어마어마하게 많은 반지들이 반짝반짝 빛을 발하며 놓여 있었어요.  
그녀가 몸을 숙여 가장 소박한 반지를 찾아보았어요, 하지만 그런 게 없지 뭐예요.
그녀가 찾고 있는데, 노파가 손에 새장 하나를 들고서 몰래나가는 게 눈에 들어왔어요.
그래서 그녀가 뒤쫓아 가 새장을 빼내서 들고 살펴보니, 안에 새 한 마리가 부리에 소박한 반지를 물고 있는 거예요.
그녀가 반지를 꺼내들고 기쁘게 내달리며 작고 흰 비둘기가 날아와 그 반지를 가져갈 거라 생각했지요.
하지만 웬걸요, 아무도 없었어요.
그래서 그녀가 어느 나무에 등을 기대고 그 비둘기를 기다릴 생각을 하고 있는데, 그녀가 그러고 서 있는 동안 마치 나무가 부드러워지고 순종적이 되는 것 같더니 나뭇가지들이 아래로 내려오지 않겠어요.
그러다 순간 나뭇가지들이 그녀를 휘감는 거 같더니 어느새 두 팔이 되어 있지 뭐예요.
그녀가 돌아보니 나무는 잘생긴 남자였고, 그 남자가 자신(그녀)을 사랑스럽게 감싸 안아 키스하며 말했어요. 
“당신이 노파로부터 마법에 걸려 있던 저를 구했어요. 노파는 사악한 마녀였답니다. 그녀가 저를 나무로 변하게 했어요. 그리고 매일 낮 2시간 동안만 흰 비둘기로 있게 했지요. 노파가 반지를 소유하고 있는 동안 저는 인간의 모습으로 돌아올 수 없었어요.” 
그때 마찬가지로 나무들로 변해있던 그의 하인들과 말들도 마법에서 풀려나 그의 옆에 서 있었지요.
그는 모두를 데리고 자신의 왕국으로 갔답니다. 왜냐면 그는 왕자님이었거든요.
그들은 결혼식을 올리고 행복하게 살았답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「숲 속의 노파」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「숲 속의 노파」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter123.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



124. 세 형제



옛날 옛적에 세 아들을 둔 남자가 살았어요. 그런데 그는 가진 게 세상에서 딱 하나 뿐이었는데, 바로 그가 사는 집이었어요.
이제 아들들은 저마다 아빠가 돌아가신 후 그 집을 물려받길 희망했어요.
하지만 아빠는 그들 모두를 똑같이 사랑하졌죠. 그래서 누구에게 집을 주는 게 좋을지 알지 못했어요.
그렇다고 그는 집을 팔아 그 돈을 나눠주고 싶지는 않았어요. 왜냐면 조상대대로 물려받은 거라 서요.
결국 그에게 좋은 아이디어 하나가 떠올랐어요.
아빠가 아들들을 모아놓고 말했어요.
“세상에 나가서 저마다 각자 기술을 배워보도록 해라. 그런 다음 돌아와라. 가장 기술이 좋은 녀석에게 이 집을 물려주겠다.”
아들들도 그 제안이 만족스러웠어요.
그래서 첫째는 대장장이가 되기로 결심했고요, 둘째는 이발사가 되기로 결심했고요, 셋째인 막내는 ‘펜싱’(찌르고 베는 경기) 교사가 되기로 결심했어요.
그들은 다시 집으로 돌아올 때를 정하고 각자 길을 떠났어요.
다행히도 그들 모두 솜씨 좋은 주인들을 만나 열심히 기술을 연마할 수 있었어요.
대장장이는 왕의 말들에 ‘편자’(말발굽을 보호하는 쇳조각)를 갈며 속으로 생각했어요.
‘집은 이제 의심할 바 없이 내 거다.’
이발사가 된 아들도 유명한 사람들의 면도를 도맡아 해주며 집은 이제 보나마나 자신의 것이 된 걸로 여겼지요.
펜싱 교사가 된 막내는 수많은 펜싱 검에 찔리면서도 입술을 꽉 깨물며 자기 긍정에의 시간을 가졌죠. ‘왜냐’ 그가 속으로 말했지요. ‘검을 두려워하는 자에게 집은 없노라.’
그들이 약속한 날짜가 되어 세 형제가 집으로 돌아와 아빠를 뵈었어요.
하지만 그들은 자신들의 솜씨를 뽐낼 최상의 기회를 어찌하면 만들 수 있을지 몰랐어요. 그리하여 그들이 앉아 의견들을 주고받았죠.
그렇게 그들이 앉아 있는데, 불쑥 산토끼 한 마리가 들판을 가로지르며 뛰어오는 거예요.
“아, 하, 잘 됐다!”라며 이발사가 말했어요.
이발사는 자신의 세면대야와 비누를 쥐더니 그 산토끼가 다가올 때까지 비누거품을 내더니 손살 같이 달려가 산토끼의 수염에 비누칠을 하곤 면도를 해주었어요. 어찌나 솜씨가 좋은지 산토끼의 피부에 상처 하나 나지 않았답니다. 
“잘 했다!”라며 노인이 말했어요. “네 형제들이 더 경이로운 솜씨들을 보여주지 못하면 이 집은 네 것이다.”
그 뒤 바로, 귀족이 탄 마차가 전속력으로 바닥을 쓸고 지나갔어요.
“아빠, 제가 배운 기술을 지금 보여드리겠습니다.”라며 대장장이가 손살 같이 그 마차를 뒤쫓아 가더니 달리고 있는 말들 중 한 마리의 발에서 ‘편자’(말발굽을 보호하는 쇳조각)들을 떼어내더니 한 치의 시간 간격도 없이 새 편자 네 개를 말의 발굽에 박아버렸어요.
“너야말로 장인이다, 동생(이발사)만큼 솜씨가 좋구나.”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “이 집을 누구에게 물려줄지 정말 모르겠구나.”
그때 셋째인 막내가 말했어요.
“아빠, 부디, 저에게도 기회를 주세요.”
때마침 비가 내리기 시작했어요.
그러자 그가 자신의 검을 뽑더니 머리 위에서 앞으로 뒤로 칼을 휘둘렸어요. 그의 솜씨가 어찌나 빠른지 빗방울 한 방울도 그를 젖이지 못했어요. 
비가 더 세차게 내리기 시작하더니 급기야는 퍼붓듯이 내렸어요.
그러자 그가 자신의 검을 더 빨리, 더 빨리 휘둘렸어요.
그리하여 이건 뭐 마른 날 집 안에 앉아 있는 듯 했어요.
이 감탄할만한 칼 솜씨를 본 아빠가 말했어요.
“정말로 기막힌 솜씨다, 이 집은 이제 네 것이다!”
두 형들 모두 이 결정에 만족해하며 아빠의 말씀에 동의했어요.
그들은 서로를 너무도 사랑했기에, 그 집에 함께 살며 각자 일을 시작했어요.
원체 그들이 기술을 잘 배웠고 솜씨가 좋았기에 그들은 큰돈을 벌 수 있었답니다.
이런 식으로 그들은 나이들 때까지 행복하게 함께 살았어요.
그러다 결국 그들 중 한 명이 병이 들어 죽게 되었어요. 그래서 나머지 두 형제들이 무척이나 상심해 그들도 또한 병이 져 누웠다 곧 세상을 떠나게 되었지요.
그들 형제가 너무 솜씨가 좋고 서로를 사랑했었기에, 그들 모두 한 무덤에 눕혔답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「세 형제」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「세 형제」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter124.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



125. 악마와 악마의 할머니



큰 전쟁이 있었어요, 그래서 국왕이 많은 병사들을 고용했지요. 하지만 그는 병사들에게 쥐꼬리만 한 월급만 주었답니다. 그 돈으로는 병사들이 생계를 유지할 수가 없었어요. 그래서 그들 중 세 명은 탈영하기로 결심을 정했지요.
그들 중 한 명이 다른 병사들에게 말했어요.
“붙잡히면 모두 교수대의 이슬로 사라질 거야, 어쩜 좋지?”
다른 병사가 말했어요.
“저기 큰 밀밭이 있어, 저기 숨어들면 아무도 우리를 발견하지 못할 거야. 군대도 저긴 들어오지 못할 걸. 그럼 내일이면 군대도 다 가버릴 거야.”
그들이 밀속으로 기어들어갔어요. 그런데 군대가 행군을 하지 않고 그 밀밭 주변에 둥글게 진을 치며 머물지 뭐예요.
그들은 밀밭에 이틀 밤낮을 머물러야했어요. 그래서 배가 너무 고파 굶어죽게 생겼지요. 나가자니 교수형이 확실할 것 같고.
그때 그들이 말했어요.
“이렇게 비참하게 여기서 죽을 줄 알았으면 탈영을 왜 한 거니?”
그때 갑자기 사나운 용 한 마리가 공중을 날아오더니 그들에게로 내려와 “왜 이렇게 숨어 있느냐?”고 물었어요.
그들이 대답했지요.
“우리들은 월급이 너무 적어 탈영한 세 병사들입니다. 여기 계속 머물면 굶어 죽게 생겼고, 그렇다고 여기서 나가면 교수형에 처할 운명이라서요.”
“만약 너희들이 나를 위해 7년간 일해주겠다면,”라며 용이 말했어요. “내가 너희들을 군대 밖으로 옮겨주겠다. 아무도 너희를 붙잡지 못하게 말이야.”
“그 제안을 받아들이는 수밖에 달리 도리가 없겠군요.”라며 그들이 대꾸했어요.
그러자 용이 자신의 발톱들로 그들을 움켜잡더니 훨훨 날아 군대 저 너머로 날아가 다시 땅위에 그들을 내려놓았어요.
하지만 그 용의 정체는 다름 아닌 악마였어요.
악마가 그들에게 작은 채찍을 하나 주며 말했어요.
“이 채찍을 휘둘러 찰싹 소리를 내면, 너희들이 바라는 만큼 금화가 사방으로 튀어나올 것이다. 그거면 너희들이 왕처럼 지낼 수 있을 게다, 말도 사고, 마차도 사고하며 살거라. 단 7년이 지나면 너희들은 나의 소유물이다.”
그런 다음 용은 그들 앞에 장부(책)를 한 권 내밀더니 세 병사들에게 각각 싸인하게 했어요.
“하지만 나는 그때 너희들에게 수수께끼를 하나 낼 것이다.”라며 악마가 말했어요. “만약 너희들이 그걸 맞추면 너희들은 자유가 될 것이고, 내 수중에서 벗어나게 된다.”
그런 다음 용이 훨훨 날아 가버렸지요.
세 병사들은 자신들의 채찍을 들고 여행을 떠났어요. 그들은 원하는 만큼 풍부한 금화를 가질 수 있었죠. 그 돈으로 그들은 부유한 옷을 입고 세상을 이리저리 여행하며 다녔답니다.
그들은 어디를 가든 즐겁고 화려하게 살았어요. 말도 타고, 마차도 몰고, 먹고 마셨죠. 하지만 나쁜 짓은 단 하나도 하지 않았답니다.
시간은 그렇게 빠르게 미끄러져 기어이 그 7년이 다 되려고 하고 있었죠.
그래서 두 병사는 갈팡질팡하고 겁이 났어요. 하지만 세 번째 병사는 대수롭지 않게 여기며 이렇게 말했죠.
“여보게들, 뭘 두려워해, 내 머리가 비상하다고, 그러니 내가 그 수수께끼를 맞추게 될 거라니까.”
그래도 두 병사들은 들판으로 나가 앉아 있었죠. 두 사람의 얼굴에 슬픔이 가득했답니다.
그때 나이든 여인이 오더니 “왜 그리 울쌍이냐?”고 물었어요.
“아아!”라며 그들이 말했지요. “당신이 상관할 바가 아니에요. 어쨌든 저희를 도울 수 없을 거예요.”
“누가 아나?”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “얘기를 털어놔봐.”
그리하여 그들은 그녀에게 자신들이 거의 7년 동안 악마의 하인으로 지낸 일이며 악마가 자신들에게 블랙베리(검은 딸기)보다 많은 금화를 준 일과, 그 대가 그들이 스스로를 악마에게 판 일과, 이제 7년이 다 되는 날 그들이 수수께끼를 맞히지 못한다면 악마가 그들의 생명을 몰수해갈 일만 남았다는 얘기들을 해주었어요.
그 노파가 말했어요.
“만약 목숨을 구하고 싶다면, 당신들 중 한 명이 얼른 숲으로 들어가게나. 거기 떨어진 바위가 작은 집처럼 보이는 곳이 있을 건데, 거기 들어가면 도움을 얻을 테니까.”
그 말에도 불구하고 절망한 두 병사는 여전히 속으로 생각했지요.
‘그래도 우릴 구할 순 없어.’
그리하여 그들은 그 자리에 계속 남아 있었지요.
하지만 원체 즐거운 세 번째 남자는 자리에서 일어나 그 숲으로 가 바위 집을 찾아냈답니다.
하지만 그 작은 집엔 아주 나이든 할머니 한 분만이 앉아 있을 뿐이었지요. 그녀는 악마의 할머니 되는 분이셨어요. 그녀가 그 병사에게 “어디서 왔으며 무얼 바라는 게냐?”라고 물었어요.
그가 그녀에게 그동안 있었던 모든 걸 말해주었어요. 그런데 그가 워낙 유쾌한 성격인지라 그게 할머니의 마음에 무척 들어나 봐요. 그래서 할머니가 그를 불쌍히 여기시곤 도움을 주겠다 말씀하셨죠.
그녀가 지하실 위에 있던 큼지막한 돌을 하나 들어 올리더니 말했어요.
“넌 여기 들어가 몸을 숨기거라, 여기라도 집안에서 나는 소리는 다 들을 수 있을 게다. 얌전히 있고 움직이지 말거라. 용이 돌아오면 내가 그 수수께끼가 뭔지 물을 테니. 그는 내게는 죄다 애기해주니, 그럼 넌 그의 대답을 잘 듣기만 하면 된단다.”
밤 12시가 되자, 그 용이 거기로 날아들어 와 저녁식사를 달라고 말했어요.
할머니는 식탁을 준비하고 음식과 마실 것을 준비했지요. 그래서 용은 기뻤어요. 그들이 함께 앉아 먹고 마셨답니다.
대화가 오고 가는 와중에, 그녀가 그에게 “오늘 하루는 어땠느냐? 오늘은 얼마나 많은 영혼들을 잡았느냐?”고 물었어요.
“오늘은 아무것도 못 얻었어요.”라며 그가 대답했어요. “하지만 병사 세 놈은 제 손아귀에 단단히 붙잡아 두었죠.”
“그러니! 병사 셋이라면, 달아나지 않겠니.”
악마가 조롱하듯이 말했어요.
“녀석들은 제 거예요! 제가 그들에게 수수께끼를 낼 텐데, 녀석들은 상상도 못한 거지요!”
“무슨 수수께끼인데?”라며 그녀가 물었어요.
“할머니한테만 말해주지요. 북해(영국 동쪽 바다)에 지금 죽은 ‘돔발 상어’(몸길이 1.4미터의 상어) 한 마리가 놓여 있어요. 제가 그 고기를 구워 녀석들에게 먹으라며 줄 거거든요. 그리고 고래 갈비뼈를 녀석들에게 은 스푼으로 줄 거고요. 그리고 늙은 말의 속이 빈 발굽 하나를 녀석들에게 포도주 잔으로 줄 거예요.”
그런 다음 악마는 침대에서 잠이 들었답니다.
할머니가 돌을 들어 올리며 병사를 밖으로 나오게 했어요.
“모든 걸 세심하게 잘 들었겠지?”
“예,”라며 그가 말했어요. “잘 들었어요. 이제 용케 목숨을 구한 거 같아요.”
그런 다음 그는 다른 길, 즉 창문을 통해 몰래 밖으로 나간 다음 전속력으로 자신의 동료들에게로 갔답니다.
그는 그들에게, 할머니가 악마를 어찌 속여 수수께끼에 대한 답을 엿듣게 되었는지를 말해주었어요.
그래서 그들은 모두 즐겁고 기운차게 채찍을 사방으로 휘두르며 자신들을 위한 금화를 잔뜩 만들어두었답니다.
7년이 완전히 끝이 나자, 악마가 장부(책)를 들고 와 그들의 싸인을 보여주며 말했어요.
“내가 이제 너희들을 지옥으로 데려갈 테다. 거기서 너희들은 식사를 하게 될 거야! 너희들이 먹게 될 그 구운 고기가 어떤 종류의 고기인지를 알면, 너희들은 자유가 되고 나와의 계약에서 해방된다, 그리고 그 채찍도 물론 계속 가지게 되고 말이야.”
그런 다음 첫 번째 병사가 나서며 말했어요.
“북해(영국 동쪽 바다)에 죽은 ‘돔발 상어’(몸길이 1.4미터의 상어) 한 마리가 놓여 있는데, 이 고기를 의심할 바 없이 그 돔발 상어를 구운 고기입니다.”
악마가 화가 나서 중얼거리기 시작했어요.
“흠! 흠! 흠!”
그리곤 두 번째 병사에게 질문을 던졌지요.
“그래 네가 쥐고 있는 지금 그 스푼은 뭐냐?”
“고래의 갈비뼈가 지금 저희들의 은 스푼입니다.”
악마가 얼굴을 찡그리며 다시 으르렁거렸어요.
“흠! 흠! 흠!”
그리곤 세 번째 병사에게 질문을 던졌지요.
“너 또한 그 포도주 잔이 뭔지 아는 게냐?”
“늙은 말의 발굽이 지금 저희들의 포도주잔입니다.”
그러자 악마가 큰 굉음을 지르며 날아가 버렸답니다.
그리하여 악마는 그들에게 더 이상 힘을 못 쓰게 되었어요.
하지만 세 병사들에겐 여전히 채찍이 있었죠, 그들은 필요한 만큼 그 채찍으로 많은 돈을 만들었고, 그렇게 죽을 때까지 행복하게 잘 살았다네요. 
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「악마와 악마의 할머니」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「악마와 악마의 할머니」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter125.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



126. 성실한 페레난트와 불성실한 페레난트



옛날 옛적에 남편과 아내가 살고 있었어요. 그들이 부자인 오랫동안은 아이가 없었답니다, 그런데 가난해지니 아들이 하나 태어났답니다.
하지만 아기에게 대부(세례식 때 참석하는 남성후견인)를 찾아줄 수 없었답니다. 그래서 아빠가 “대부를 찾으러 이웃마을에 다녀오겠소.”라고 아내에게 말했어요.
아빠가 가는데 가난한 남자를 만났어요. 그 남자가 “어디 가십니까?”라고 물어왔어요.
아바가 “대부를 찾으러 갑니다. 그런데 제가 가난해서 아무도 제 아이의 대부를 서주려 하지 않네요.”라고 말했어요.
“오,”라며 가난한 남자가 말했어요. “당신도 가난하고 나도 가난하니, 제가 대부가 되어드리리다. 하지만 나는 너무도 가난하여 아이에게 줄 게 아무 것도 없다오. 어서 집에 가셔서 유모(아기를 돌보는 사람)보고 아기를 데리고 교회로 오라고 하십시오.”
그들이 모두 함께 교회에 가보니, 그 거지도 이미 와 있었어요. 그가 아기에게 ‘충실한 페레난트’라는 이름을 지어주었어요.
교회를 막 나서려던 거지가 말했어요.
“집에 잘 가시구려, 내가 아이에게 아무 것도 줄 수 없으니, 마찬가지로 당신도 내게 아무 것도 안 주셔도 됩니다.”
하지만 그는 대신 유모에게는 열쇠하나를 주며 말했어요.
“집에 가시거든 이 열쇠를 아기 아빠에게 주시오. 그보고 아이가 14살이 될 때까지 이 열쇠를 잘 간직하라 이르시오. 그런 다음 자란 아이가 황야로 나가보면 성이 하나 서 있을 텐데 이 열쇠가 꼭 맞을 거요, 그럼 성 안에 있는 모든 게 그의 것이오.”
이제 소년은 7살이 되었어요. 
다 자란 소년이 또래 아이들과 놀이를 하는데, 아이들이 서로 자신들이 대부로부터 더 많은 선물을 받았다 자랑하지 뭐예요.
하지만 소년은 아무 말도 할 게 없었죠.
그래서 난처해진 소년이 집에 와 아빠에게 말했어요.
“왜 나만 아무 것도 안 받았는데, 대부한테서?”
“오, 얘야,”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “황야에 서 있는 성에 맞는 열쇠를 너도 받았단다, 가서 열어보렴.”
하지만 소년이 거기 가보니, 성은 고사하고 아무 것도 없어 고개를 돌려야만했지요.
그 후 7년이 더 흘러, 이제 그는 14살이 되었지요.
그가 다시 거리로 가보니 정말 성이 하나 서 있었어요.
그가 열고 들어가니, 안에는 말 딱 한 마리밖에 아무 것도 없었지요. 말은 백마(흰 말)였어요.
소년이 자기 말을 가지게 된 게 몹시 기뻐 말에 올라타 전속력으로 달려 아빠에게 돌아왔지요.
“저 이제 백마가 생겼으니, 여행을 떠날래요.”라고 그가 말했어요. 
그리하여 그가 여행을 떠나게 되었답니다. 
가는 도중 길가에 펜이 하나 놓여 있었어요.
처음엔 주우려고 하다 가만 생각했지요.
‘두고 가면, 필요한 사람이 찾아가겠지.’
그가 말을 타고 떠나려는데, 뒤에서 목소리가 들려왔어요.
“성실한 ‘페레난트’(←독일어. 영어→페르디난드)야, 그걸 주어가렴.”
그가 돌아보니 아무도 안 보였어요. 그래도 그가 다시 돌아와 펜을 주었답니다.
그가 말을 타고 좀 더 가니 호수가 나왔는데, 지나가다 보니 둑에 물고기 한 마리가 드러누운 채 숨을 헐떡이며 죽기 일보직전이지 뭐예요.
그가 말했어요.
“있어봐, 물고기야, 내가 널 물로 다시 옮겨줄게.”
그가 물고기의 꼬리를 집어 호수에 던져주었어요.
그러자 물고기가 물 위로 고개를 내밀며 말했어요.
“진흙 속에 빠진 저를 도와주었으니 저도 당신께 피리를 드릴게요. 도움이 필요하실 때 이 피리를 불어보세요, 그럼 제가 당신을 도와드릴게요, 만약 물에 빠뜨린 게 있음 그 피리를 부세요, 제가 다시 가져다 드릴 테니까요.” 
그런 다음 그가 말을 타고 더 가니, “어디 가요?”라고 묻는 남자가 한 명 다가왔어요.
“오, 이웃마을로요.”
그러자, “이름은 무엇이오?”
“충실한 페레난트요.”
“그렇소! 우리 이름이 얼추 같군. 내 이름은 불성실한 페레난트거든.”
그리하여 그들 둘은 가장 가까이에 있던 여관으로 향했지요.
불행하게도, 불성실한 페레난트란 사람은 상대방의 생각과 무얼 하려는지를 알아챌 수 있는 능력이 있었어요. 또한 온갖 사악한 술수들에도 능했지요.
하지만 그 여관에는 정직한 아가씨가 한 분 있었는데, 얼굴도 준수하고 행동거지도 올바랐죠.
그녀가 잘생긴 성실한 페레난트에게 첫눈에 반해버렸답니다. 그래서 그녀가 “어디 가세요?”라고 그에게 물었지요.
“오, 세상을 이리저리 떠돌아다녀보려고요.”라고 그가 말했어요.
그러자 그녀가 “그럼 여기 머무세요, 왜냐면 이 곳 왕께서도 수행원이나 ‘기마 시종’(마차의 앞이나 옆에서 수행하는 사람)을 구하고 계시거든요. 당신이면 얻을 수 있을 거예요.”라고 말했어요.
“하지만 저를 추천해줄 사람 하나 없는 걸요.”라고 그가 대답했지요.
그러자 처녀가 말했어요.
“오, 제가 한번 말씀 드려볼게요.”
그리하여 그녀는 곧장 왕께 가 “하인으로 쓸 만한 괜찮은 사람을 알아요.”라고 말씀드렸죠.
왕도 그 제안을 선뜻 반기셨어요. 그래서 성실한 페레난트는 왕을 위해 봉사하게 되었답니다.  
게다가 자신의 말을 둘 곳도 얻고 같이 다닐 수도 있어 기마 시종이 더 되고 싶었던 그가 말씀드렸더니 왕이 그를 기마 시종으로 삼으셨어요.
불성실한 페레난트가 이 소식을 듣고 그 아가씨에게 말했어요.
“뭐요! 왜 그만 돕고 난 안 돕는데?”
“오,”라며 아가씨가 말했어요. “당신도 도와드릴게요.”
그녀는 생각했어요.
‘이 사람은 믿음이 안 가, 그냥 사이좋게만 지내야겠다.’
그녀는 이번에도 왕께 가 그를 하인으로 제안 드렸고, 왕은 기꺼이 받아주었어요.
왕은 아침이면 자신의 신하들을 만났는데, 항상 푸념하며 말했지요.
“오, 사랑하는 그 여인을 가질 수만 있다면.”
이때쯤에는 불성실한 페레난트는 항시 성실한 페레난트를 적대시하던 찰나였어요.
그래서 한 번은 왕이 또 불평을 하시자, 그가 말씀드렸지요.
“기마 시종 있지 않습니까, 그를 그녀에게 보내보십시오. 만약 데려오지 못하면 목을 날려버리십시오.”
그러자 왕이 사람을 시켜 성실한 페레난트를 부르며 “어서 이러이러한 곳으로 가서 내가 사랑하는 아가씨를 이리로 데려 오거라, 만약 데려오지 못하면 죽음을 면치 못하리라.”라고 엄포를 놓았어요.
성실한 페레난트가 자신의 백마가 있는 가축우리로 가 한탄하고 걱정하며 말했어요.
“오, 지지리 복도 없는 나!”
그때 누군가가 뒤에서 소리쳤어요.
“성실한 페레난트여, 왜 우시나요?”
그가 돌아보니 아무도 없는 거예요, 그래서 그가 계속 탄식을 하였지요.
“오, 내 사랑하는 백마야, 이제 널 떠나야겠구나, 난 이제 죽은 목숨이거든.”
그때 누구가가 다시 한 번 소리쳤어요.
“성실한 페레난트여, 왜 우시나요?”
그제야 그는 질문을 던지고 있는 게 자신의 사랑하는 백마란 것을 깨달았지요.
“네가 말했니, 사랑하는 백마야, 어쩜 말도 하는 구나?”
그가 재차 말했어요.
“난 이제 이러이러한 장소로 가서 신부를 데려와야 하는데, 내가 어찌하면 좋을지 네가 좀 말해줄 수 있겠니?”
그러자 백마가 대답했지요.
“왕께 가서, 꼭 가져가야한다며, 먼저 달라고 하실 게 있으세요. 고기를 한가득 채운 배 한 척과, 빵을 가득 채운 배 한 척이 그것이에요, 만약 그게 가능하다면요. 호수엔 큰 거인들이 사는데 그들에게 고기를 주지 않음 그들이 당신을 찢어죽일 거예요, 그리고 호수엔 큰 새들도 있는데 그들에게 빵을 주지 않음 그들이 당신의 얼굴에서 눈알을 ○버릴 거고요.”
그리하여 왕은 왕국에 사는 모든 정육점주인들에게 도축을 지시했고, 빵가게 주인들에게 빵을 만들길 지시해, 배들에 한가득 채워주었지요.
짐을 다 싣고 나자, 사랑스런 백마가 성실한 페레난트에게 말했어요.
“이제 저를 올라타 배에 오르세요, 그런 다음 거인들이 오면 말하세요, ‘평화, 평화, 친애하는 거인들아, 너희들을 생각해서, 내가 뭘 좀 가져왔는데 먹으렴.’ 그리고 새들이 날아오면 이렇게 말하세요, ‘평화, 평화, 친애하는 새들아, 너희들을 생각해서, 내가 뭘 좀 가져왔는데 먹으렴.’라고요. 그럼 그들도 당신을 어찌하진 못할 거예요, 그리고 성에 도착하면 그 거인들이 당신을 도와주기까지 할 거예요. 그럼 당신은 두세 명의 거인들을 데리고 그 성으로 올라가세요. 거기에 공주님이 잠들어있을 건데, 절대 그녀를 깨우면 안돼요, 거인들보고 공주를 침대와 함께 들어 배에 싣게 하셔야해요.”
이제 모든 것이 어린 백마가 말한 그대로 벌어졌답니다. 
성실한 페레난트는 거인들과 새들에게 자지고 간 것들을 주었어요. 그 바람에 거인들이 기꺼이 나서 주었지요. 그들은 침대 채로 공주님을 왕께 데려다주었어요.
왕을 본 공주는 “제 작품(저술)들과 떨어져선 살 수 없어요. 그것들은 제 성에 그대로 있답니다.”라고 말했어요.
그래서 불성실한 페레난트의 부추김에 의해, 성실한 페레난트가 또 불려왔고, 왕은 그에게 “성으로 다시 돌아가서 공주의 작품(저술)들을 가져오라” 명령했어요, 만에 하나 그가 실패하면 죽이겠다 엄포를 놓았지요.
그러자 그는 다시 한 번 마구간으로 가서 스스로를 한탄하며 말했지요.
“오, 사랑하는 백마야, 이제 또 가게 생겼어, 나 어쩌니?”
그때 사랑하는 백마가 배들에 다시 한 번 가득 실어라 말했어요.
그리하여 전과 같은 일들이 또 벌어졌답니다, 거인들과 새들은 만족을 했어요, 특히 고기를 거나하게 먹은 거인들이 온화해졌지요.
그들은 성에 도착하자, 백마가 성실한 페레난트에게 말했어요.
“안에 들어가시면 공주님 침실에 있는 책상 위에 작품(저술)이 놓여 있을 거에요.”
그래서 성실한 페레난트가 들어가서 그걸 집어왔답니다.
그들이 호수를 건널 때, 그가 그만 자신의 펜을 물속에 떨어뜨리고 말았어요. 
그러자 백마가 말했지요.
“이건 저도 어찌할 수 없네요.”
하지만 그는 자신의 피리를 기억해내곤 불기 시작했지요.
그러자 그 물고기가 입에 펜을 물고 와 그에게 건네주었답니다.
그래서 그가 작품을 들고 성으로 가자, 결혼식이 성대하게 거행되었답니다.
하지만 왕비님은 왕을 사랑하지 않았어요. 왕에게 코가 전혀 없었거든요. 
하지만 왕비님은 성실한 페레난트는 무척이나 사랑하셨죠.
그러다 한 번은 조정의 귀족들이 모두 모인 가운데, 왕비님이 “제가 날랜 마술을 할 수 있답니다. 사람의 목을 잘라 다시 붙이는 묘기이죠. 누가 한 번 나서줘 보세요.”라고 당차게 말씀하셨죠.
하지만 바보가 아닌 이상 아무도 안 나서려고 했지요.
그때 불성실한 페레난트의 부추김에 의해, 성실한 페레난트가 또 나서게 되었고, 왕비님은 그의 목을 싹둑 벤 다음 다시 붙여놓았죠. 어찌나 감쪽같이 상처가 아물었던지 빨간 실밥만 그의 목주변에 남았을 뿐이었답니다.
그러자 왕이 왕비에게 말했어요.
“우리 애기, 어디서 그걸 다 배우셨소?”
“네,”라며 왕비가 말했어요. “방법이 다 있어서요. 그럼 한 번 해보시게요?”
“오, 좋소,”라며 왕이 말했어요.
하지만 왕비는 왕의 목을 싹둑 벤 다음 원래대로 다시 붙이지 않고 짐짓 뭐가 잘 안 들어맞는 척 연기했어요. 그 바람에 왕의 생명을 되살릴 수 없었지요.
그리하여 왕이 묻히자, 왕비님은 성실한 페레난트와 결혼하였답니다.
한편 그는 항상 자신의 백마만 타고 다녔답니다.
그러다 한 번은 그가 백마에 올라탔을 때, 백마가 그에게 말했지요.
“잘 아시는 그 황야(백마가 살던 성이 있던 황야)로 가 전속력으로 세 바퀴만 돌아주세요.”
그가 그렇게 하고나자, 백마가 자신의 두 뒷발로 불끈하고 일어서더니 왕자님으로 변신하였다네요.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「성실한 페레난트와 불성실한 페레난트」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「성실한 페레난트와 불성실한 페레난트」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter126.html

다만 동화제목과 주인공 이름은 아래 독일어 원문대로 해석함
독일어 원문(1815년) ▶ https://de.wikisource.org/wiki/Ferenand_getr%C3%BC_un_Ferenand_ungetr%C3%BC_(1815) 
그런데 ‘페레난트’란 이름이 독일어사전에 없음? *_* 독일어 이름이 독일어 사전에 없어... 뭐니 이 상황... 독일어 제목이 다 독일어 사전에서 검색이 안 됨 ㅜ_ㅜ 그동안 사라진 단어들인가? 아닌가?
읽어주셔서 감사합니다~ㅋㅋ♥



127. 무쇠 난로



소망만 해도 이루어지던 시대에, 왕자님이 늙은 마녀에 의해 마법에 걸려 숲 속에 있는 무쇠 난로에 갇히고 말았어요.
오랜 세월이 지나도록 아무도 그를 구할 수 없었지요.
그러던 한번은 공주님이 그 숲에 들어왔다 그만 길을 잃어 아빠가 계신 궁전으로 다시 돌아가지 못하고 말았어요.
그녀는 9일을 헤매다 결국 그 무쇠 난로에 도착했어요.
그때 난로에서 목소리가 들리며 그녀에게 요구했어요.
“어디서 오셨고, 어디로 가시나요, 그대?”
그녀가 대답했지요.
“아빠가 계신 궁전으로 가는 길을 잃어 집에 다시 못 돌아가고 있답니다.”
그러자 무쇠 난로 안의 그 목소리가 말했어요.
“제가 당신이 다시 집에 도착하도록 도와드릴게요, 그것도 가장 빨리요, 다만 그 대가로 제가 원하는 걸 해주시겠다고 약속해주세요. 저는 당신 아빠의 왕국보다 훨씬 큰 왕국의 왕자님이랍니다. 저는 당신과 결혼할 거예요.”
그 바람에 그녀가 덜컥 겁이나 생각했어요.
‘원 세상에! 무쇠 난로가 나를 어쩌겠다는 거지?’
하지만 정말이지 얼른 아빠가 계신 집으로 돌아가고 싶어서 그는 그가 바라는 대로 하겠다고 약속하고 말았답니다.
그러자 그가 말했어요.
“그럼 돌아가시는 대로, 칼을 가지고 여기로 다시 돌아와 무쇠를 긁어 구멍을 내주시면 돼요.”
그런 다음 그는 그녀에게 함께 걸어갈 말동무를 한 명 붙여주었어요. 물론 말은 안 했지만 여기선 말동무라고 하는 거예요. 그리고 딱 2시간 만에 말동무가 그녀를 집까지 무사히 안내해주었답니다.
공주가 귀가하자 성안에선 기쁨의 난리가 났어요.
나이 든 왕은 딸애의 목을 얼싸 앉으며 키스를 해주었답니다.
하지만 그녀는 지금 이게 문제가 아니라 말씀드렸지요.
“사랑하는 아빠, 저 이제 어째요! 무쇠 난로를 못 만났음 울창한 숲에서 헤어 나오지 못했을 거예요, 하지만 그 바람에 제가 다시 돌아가 그를 풀어주고 결혼해주겠다는 약속을 하고 말았어요. 앙앙!”
그러자 아빠 왕도 덜컥 겁이나 얼굴이 창백해지고 말았답니다. 왜긴요 공주가 그의 외동딸이었기 때문이지요.
그리하여 그들이 그녀대신 방앗간 집 주인의 딸을 보내기로 했답니다. 왜냐면 그녀도 무척이나 아름다웠거든요.
사람들이 그녀를 거기 데려다주고 칼을 쥐어주며 이 무쇠 난로를 긁으라고 말했어요.
그래서 그녀가 24시간 동안이나 박박 긁어보았지만 조금도 긁지 못했어요.
동이 트자 난로에서 목소리가 들려왔어요.
“밖에 날이 새려는 모양이군요!”
그래서 그녀가 대답했지요.
“네 그런 거 같아요. 저희 아빠의 방앗간 돌아가는 소리가 들리는 듯 하거든요.”
“그러니까 당신은 방앗간 집 딸이군요! 썩 꺼지세요, 어서 가서 공주님을 오라고 하세요.”
그래서 그녀가 가서 나이 든 왕에게 “그 남자가 다른 누구도 아닌 공주님을 원하더라”고 말씀드렸지요.
하지만 사람들은 이번엔 ‘돼지를 돌보는 사람’의 딸에게 한 조각의 금을 주며 공주 대신 무쇠 난로에 가라고 시켰답니다. 그녀가 방앗간 집 딸보다 훨씬 더 예뻤거든요.
그리하여 그녀가 거기로 안내받아 가 24시간 동안을 무쇠 난로를 박박 긁었지만 그녀 또한 아무 것도 긁지 못했답니다.
날이 밝자, 난로 안에서 목소리가 들려왔어요.
“밖에 날이 새려는 모양이군요!”
그러자 그녀가 대답했어요.
“네 그런 거 같아요. 저희 아빠가 부는 뿔피리 소리가 들리는 듯 하거든요.”
“그러니까 당신은 ‘돼지를 돌보는 사람’의 딸이군요! 썩 꺼지세요, 어서 가서 공주님을 오라고 하세요. 그녀보고 약속을 지키라 하세요, 만약 계속 이렇게 나올 거면, 왕국에 있는 모든 걸 무너뜨리고 파괴할 거라고 하세요, 그럼 아무 것도 남아나는 게 없게 되고 말아요.”
이 말을 전해들은 공주가 울기 시작했어요, 이젠 약속을 지키지 않을 방도가 없었으니까요.
그래서 그녀가 아빠에게 작별인사를 드리고 호주머니에 칼을 넣어 숲에 있는 그 무쇠 난로로 갔지요.
그녀가 거기 도착해 긁기 시작하니 무쇠가 뚝뚝 나가떨어지기 시작하더니 2시간도 안 되어서 벌써 작은 구멍이 하나 나 있었어요.
그런 다음 그녀가 안을 들여다보니 잘생긴 한 젊은 청년이 금과 보석들로 아주 훌륭하게 치장을 하고 있지 뭐예요, 그 바람에 그녀는 정신이 번쩍 들며 너무도 기뻤답니다.
그리하여 이제 그녀가 더 긁고 긁어 그 청년이 나올 만큼 큰 구멍을 내는데 성공했어요.
그러자 그가 말했어요.
“당신은 내꺼, 난 당신 꺼요. 당신은 내 신부시며 나를 구해주었소.”
그는 그녀를 데리고 자신의 왕국으로 가고 싶다고 말했어요.
하지만 그녀는 그러기 전에 자신의 아빠를 한 번만 더 보고 가게 해 달라 간청했지요, 왕자님이 허락해주었어요. 
하지만 왕자님은 조건을 내걸었어요.
“절대 당신 아버님께 세 마디 이상을 해선 안 돼요, 그런 다음 다시 돌아와 주시구려.”
그녀는 집에 갔어요, 하지만 아빠를 다시 본 게 너무 반가워 세 말 이상을 하고 말았지요. 그 즉시 무쇠 난로는 사라지고, 그 자리엔 유리 산들과 뾰족한 칼들이 들어섰지요.
하지만 왕자님은 마법에서 풀려나 더는 무쇠 난로에 갇히지는 않으셨답니다.
이후 그녀가 아빠에게 작별인사를 드리고 많진 않았지만 주시는 돈을 받아들고 그 울창한 숲으로 돌아와 무쇠 난로를 찾았지만 그건 이미 그 어디에도 없었어요.
9일 낮 동안 헤맨 끝에 너무 배도 고픈데 이제 어찌해야할 지를 모르겠는데 마음이 아파 더는 살 수 없을 거 같았지요.
그날 저녁 그녀가 작은 나무속에 앉아 있었어요. 야생들짐승들이 무서워서 그 안에서 밤을 지새울 생각이었거든요. 
밤 12시가 가까워지자 저 멀리서 작은 불빛 하나가 보이는 거 같아 그녀가 생각했지요.
‘아, 다행이다, 난 살았어!’
그녀가 나무에서 내려와 불빛을 향해 나아갔어요. 가면서 그녀는 감사기도를 드리는 걸 잊지 않았답니다.
그녀가 그 작고 낡은 집에 도착해보니, 집 주위로 무성한 잔디들이 키 만큼이나 자라나 있고, 마당 앞에는 작게 자른 장작더미가 하나 수북이 쌓아져 있었어요.
그녀가 생각했어요.
‘아, 이제 어쩌지.’
그녀가 창문을 통해 안을 들여다보니, 안에는 두꺼비들 외엔 아무도 없었어요.
큰 두꺼비와 작은 두꺼비들이 포도주와 구운 고기가 차려진 식탁 하나에 둘러앉아 있었는데, 접시와 잔들이 모두 은으로 만들어진 거였어요(그 두꺼비들이 악마가 아니라는 얘기임).
그래서 그녀가 용기를 내 문을 똑똑 노크했답니다.
살찐 두꺼비가 외쳤어요,
“작은 초록 시녀(몸종)야, 절뚝절뚝 다리의 시녀야, 절뚝절뚝 다리의 강아지야, 이쪽저쪽으로 어서 뛰어가서, 누가 오셨나 보고 오려무나.”
작은 두꺼비 한 마리가 오더니 그녀(공주)에게 문을 열어주었어요.
그녀가 들어가 보니, 두꺼비들이 그녀를 환영해주며, 자리에 앉으라, 권해주었어요.
두꺼비들이 물었어요.
“어디서 오셨고, 어디로 가시나요, 그대?”
그래서 그녀가 자신에게 닫친 불행들을 죄다 얘기해주었답니다.
“아빠에게 세 마디 이상을 해선 안 된다는 주문을 받고서도 그만 일을 그르치고 말았지 뭐예요. 그 바람에 난로며 왕자님이며 모두가 사라져버려, 지금은 언덕과 골짜기를 건너 그 이를 찾을 때까지 가 보려고요.”
그때 나이 많은 살찐 두꺼비가 말했어요,
“작은 초록 시녀(몸종)야, 절뚝절뚝 다리의 시녀야, 절뚝절뚝 다리의 강아지야, 이쪽저쪽으로 어서 뛰어가서, 보물 상자를 가져오려무나.”
그러자 작은 두꺼비가 가더니 상자를 들고 왔어요.
이후 두꺼비들이 그녀에게 고기와 음료수를 주었고, 그녀를 잘 만든 침대로 안내해주었답니다. 비단과 벨벳(짧고 고운 털)이 포근함을 주는 그 침대에 그녀는 누워 “아무쪼록 이상 없게 해주세요.”라고 하느님께 기도를 드린 다음 잠이 들었답니다.
아침이 다가올 때 그녀가 깨어나 보니, 나이 많은 그 두꺼비가 보물 상자에서 바늘 세 개를 꺼내며 “이것을 가져가라”며 그녀에게 건네주었어요. 
“이게 꼭 필요할 게다. 왜냐면 높다란 유리 산을 넘고 세 개의 뾰족한 검들과 큰 호수를 건너려면 말이다. 이 세 고비를 넘어 연인을 다시 찾으려면 이 세 가지가 필요하니 소중히 품고 가거라.”
그 세 가지는 바로, 세 개의 커다란 바늘들과, 쟁기(땅을 가는 농기구)바퀴와, 그리고 호두 세 개였답니다.
이것을 가지고 그녀가 여행을 다시 시작했답니다.
그래서 아주 미끄러운 유리 산에 도착했지요.
그녀는 우선 바늘 세 개를 꽂은 다음 발로 밟고 올라갔어요, 그리하여 유리 산을 다 넘을 수 있었지요.
다 넘은 다음 바늘 세 개를 근처에 잘 숨겨두고 주의 깊게 표시를 해두었답니다.
이후 그녀는 세 개의 뾰족한 검들에 도착했어요, 그런 다음 그녀는 쟁기바퀴에 앉은 다음 바퀴를 굴렸어요.
마침내 그녀가 큰 호수 앞에 도착했어요. 그녀는 그것도 건넜답니다.
그녀가 드디어 커고 아름다운 성에 도착을 했어요.
그녀는 가서 일자리가 있나 물어보았어요.
“저는 가난한 소녀랍니다. 여기서 일해보고 싶어요.”
하지만 그녀는 자신이 울창한 숲에 있던 그 무쇠 난로에서 구해준 왕자님이 이 성에 계시다는 사실을 잘 알고 있었어요.
그런 다음 그녀는 낮은 임금을 받고 식기 닦는 하녀로 취직을 했어요.
하지만 왕자님은 자기 옆에 결혼 싶은 다른 아가씨가 있었지 뭐예요, 왜냐면 왕지님은 그녀(여주인공. 공주)가 이미 죽었다 생각했던 거지요. 
저녁에 식기를 다 닦은 그녀가 호주머니에서 뭔가를 느끼곤 꺼내보니 그건 나이 많은 두꺼비가 주었던 세 개의 호두였어요.
그녀가 이빨로 하나를 깨뜨려 호두알을 막 먹으려고 보니 품위 있는 공주 옷이 호두 안에서 나오지 뭐예요!
하지만 이 소식을 전해들은 신부가 오더니 그 드레스를 달라고 했어요, 자신이 사겠다는 거지요.
신부가 말했어요.
“부엌데기에겐 과분한 드레스잖니.”
하지만 그녀는 “아뇨”라고 말했어요. “전 팔지 않을 테예요. 하지만 신부님이 한 가지 소원만 들어주신다면 그리할 게요, 제가 신랑 방에서 하룻밤만 잘 수 있게 해주세요.”
신부는 허락해주었어요, 왜냐면 너무도 그 드레스가 아름다웠기에 가지지 않고는 못 베길 지경이었거든요.
저녁이 되자 신부가 신랑에게 말했어요.
“바보 멍청이 소녀 하나가 당신 방에서 재워달라는데.”
“당신만 괜찮다면 나는 괜찮아.”라며 그가 말했지요.
하지만 신부는 잠 오는 약을 넣은 포도주를 그에게 주었답니다.
그래서 식기 닦는 하녀가 자러 방에 왔을 때는, 왕자님이 너무도 곤히 잠들어 있어서 그녀로선 절대 그를 깨울 수가 없었어요.
그녀는 밤새 울며 소리쳤답니다.
“울창한 숲에 있던 그 무쇠 난로에서 당신을 구해준 전데, 제가 유리 산을 넘고, 세 개의 뾰족 검들과 큰 호수를 지나 이렇게 당신을 찾아왔는데, 왜 제 목소리를 들으시질 못하시는 거예요!”
침실 문 옆에 하인들이 앉아 있다 그녀가 밤새도록 울며 하는 소리를 다 들곤, 아침에 자신의 주인(왕자님)에게 말해주었지요.
다음날 저녁 식기들을 다 씻은 다음 그녀가 두 번째 호두를 까보니 그 안에서 전날보다 훨씬 더 아름다운 드레스가 나오지 뭐예요.
그 드레스를 본 신부가 그것도 사고 싶어 했어요.
하지만 소녀는 돈을 받지 않으려했어요, 다만 신랑 침실에서 한 번 더 잘 수 있게만 해달라고 말했지요.
하지만 신부는 이번에도 왕자님에게 잠이 오는 약을 주어 왕자가 곤히 잠이 든 나머지 어떤 소리도 못 듣게 만들어버렸답니다.
하지만 식기 닦는 하녀는 밤새 울며 소리쳤어요.
“울창한 숲에 있던 그 무쇠 난로에서 당신을 구해준 전데, 제가 유리 산을 넘고, 세 개의 뾰족 검들과 큰 호수를 지나 이렇게 당신을 찾아왔는데, 왜 제 목소리를 들으시질 못하시는 거예요!”
침실 문 옆에 하인들이 앉아 있다 그녀가 밤새도록 울며 하는 소리를 다 들곤, 아침에 자신의 주인(왕자님)에게 말해주었지요.
셋째 날 밤이 되자, 그녀가 식기들을 다 씻은 다음 세 번째 호두를 까보니 그 안에선 전날들보다 훨씬 더 아름다운 순금으로 만든 아름다운 드레스가 나오지 뭐예요.
이걸 본 신부가 사고 싶어했어요.
하지만 처녀는 세 번째로 신랑 방에서 잘 수 있게 해달란 조건 하나만 내걸었지요.
하지만 이 셋째 날엔 왕자님도 경계를 늦추지 않고 잠 오는 그 약을 버려버렸답니다.
그런 까닭에 그녀가 울며 다음과 같이 소리치기 시작했을 때,
“그 끔찍이도 울창하던 숲에서 무쇠 난로 속에 갇혀 있던 당신을 구해준 저예요, 사랑하는 연인이여.”
왕자님이 벌떡 일어나시며 말했지요.
“맞소, 당신이 진정 내 신부요, 당신은 내꺼, 난 당신 꺼요.”
그 후 즉시 밤이 깊었지만 그는 마차에 그녀를 태웠어요. 그리고 가짜 신부의 옷을 벗겨 침대에서 일어나지 못하게 했지요.
그들은 큰 호수에 도착해 노를 저어 건넜답니다.
그들이 세 개의 뾰족한 칼들에 도착했을 때, 그들은 쟁기바퀴에 타고 건넜지요.
그리고 유리 산에 도착했을 땐, 세 개의 바늘을 찌르며 산을 넘었지요.
결국 그들이 작고 낡은 집에 도착했어요.
그들이 들어서고 보니 그건 어느 새 큰 성이 되어 있었고 안에 있던 두꺼비들도 모두 마법에서 풀려나 왕녀 자제분들로 되돌아가 있었답니다. 행복한 왕자님들과 공주님들로 말이예요.
그런 다음 결혼식이 성대하게 치러졌어요.
왕자님과 공주는 그 성에 머물렀지요. 그 성이 그들의 아빠들의 성보다 훨씬 더 컸거든요.
하지만 나이 드신 왕(공주의 아빠)이 홀로 된 것을 슬퍼하신다는 소식을 전해 듣곤, 가서 모시고 와 함께 살았죠. 
그리하여 그들은 두 왕국을 가지게 되었고요, 행복한 결혼생활을 영위하였답니다.
어머나, 저기 생쥐 한 마리가 뛰어가네요, 그래요 우리 얘기는 여기서 끝이랍니다~♥.

(동화 끝)

동화 「무쇠 난로」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「무쇠 난로」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter127.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



128. 게으른 실 잣는 여인



옛날에 어떤 마을에 남편과 그의 아내가 살고 있었어요.
그런데 아내가 너무도 게을러 손도 까딱 안하려는 거 있죠.
남편이 실을 뽑으라며 뭘 주던 간에 그녀는 까딱하지 않았어요. 그렇게 그녀는 실을 뽑지도 않고 그렇다고 돌리지도 않은 채 수북이 쌓아만 두었죠.
행여나 남편이 그녀를 비난하면 그녀는 기다리고 있었다는 듯 이렇게 혀를 나불거렸죠.
“음, 어떻게 돌려요, 실을 감는 ‘얼레’(나무 막대기)가 없는데? 아님 당신이 숲으로 가서 하나 구해오시든가요.”
“그것만 있으면 된다 이거지.”라며 남편이 말했어요. “내 숲으로 가서 얼레 만들 만한 좋은 나무를 구해오리다.”
그러자 아내는 벌컥 겁이 났어요. 만약 남편이 나무를 구해와 얼레를 만들어주면, 그녀는 빼도 박도 못하고 실을 만들어야하니까요.“
그녀가 잠시 생각에 생각을 해보더니 좋은 아이디어 하나가 떠올라 몰래 남편의 뒤를 쫓아 숲으로 들어갔어요.
남편이 나무를 고른 후 베려고 나무에 오르자, 그녀가 그 나무 아래 수풀 속으로 기어들어가 숨더니 소리쳤어요.
“얼레 만들려고 나무를 베는 자 죽으리라, 얼레에 실을 감는 자 멸망하리라.”
그 소리를 들은 남자가 잠시 도끼를 내려놓고 지금 이게 뭔 소린지 생각해보기 시작했어요.
“어이,”라며 그가 마침내 말했지요. “뭔 소리가 들렸다는 거야. 새가 지저귀는 소리를 들은 게지. 별 거 아냐.”
그래서 그가 다시 도끼를 잡고 막 베려는데, 그 노랫소리가 아래에서 다시 들려오지 뭐예요.
“얼레 만들려고 나무를 베는 자 죽으리라, 얼레에 실을 감는 자 멸망하리라.”
남자도 작업을 멈추곤 겁을 먹고 이 상황이 지금 뭔지 생각해보기 시작했어요.
하지만 잠시 지나자 그가 마음을 잡아먹곤 세 번째로 도끼에 손을 뻗어 나무를 베려고 했어요.
하지만 누군가의 목소리가 세 번째로 들려왔어요. 이번엔 더 크게 말이죠.
“얼레 만들려고 나무를 베는 자 죽으리라, 얼레에 실을 감는 자 멸망하리라.”
이 정도면 충분했어요. 작업하고 싶던 마음이 남자에게서 싹 사라졌으니까요.
그래서 남자가 허겁지겁 나무 아래로 내려와 집으로 막 돌아갔어요.
여자는 죽기 살기로 뛰어 샛길들을 통해 집에 먼저 도착했어요.
그리고 남편이 거실로 들어오자 여자가 아무 일도 없었다는 듯 순진무구한 얼굴로 말했어요.
“여봉, 얼레 만들 좋은 나무는 베어 왔어요?”
“아니,”라며 그가 말했어요. “얼레 안 쓰는 게 좋겠어.”
그리곤 남편은 숲에서 있었던 일을 죄다 아내에게 알려주었고, 그 이후 그녀에게도 평화가 찾아왔지요.
그럼에도 불구하고 좀 지나자, 남편이 다시 집안 꼬라지가 말이 아니라며 불평을 하기 시작했어요.
“여보,”라며 그가 말했어요. “실타래들이 저렇게 널브려져 있는 게 수치스럽지도 않소!”
“그래서 제가 말했잖아오.”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “얼레만 구해다 주면 하겠다고. 그럼 당신이 다락으로 올라가세요, 내가 아래에 서 있다 실을 위로 던져줄테니, 그럼 당신도 내게로 실을 던지면 어쨌든 실타래는 정리될 거예요.”
“그 좋네, 그리 하지.”라며 남편이 말했어요.
그래서 그들이 했고, 모든 실타래들을 정리했을 때, 남편이 말했어요.
“실타래도 정리됐으니 이젠 삶아야지.”
여자가 다시 고민에 빠졌어요.
그녀가 맞장구를 치며 말했어요.
“네, 내일 아침 일찍 삶읍시다.”
하지만 그녀는 여기에 몰래 속임수를 걸었지요.
아침 일찍 일어난 그녀가 불을 피우곤 솥을 올려놓은 다음 그 안에 실타래 대신 아마 부스러기를 잔뜩 넣곤 팔팔 삶았어요.
그 후 그녀는 침대에 누워 자고 있는 남편에게로 가 말했지요.
“내가 지금 나가봐야 하니까, 당신이 일어나 솥에 넣고 삼고 있는 실타래 좀 살펴봐요. 제 때 봐야 하니까 명심하고요. 수탉이 우는데도 안 들여다봤다간 아마 부스러기로 변하고 만다고요.”
남편도 그럴 생각이었고 절대 빈둥거릴 마음이 없어서, 수탉이 울 때 할 수 있는 가장 빨리 일어나 부엌으로 갔어요. 
하지만 솥을 열고 들여다보니 아뿔싸 이건 뭐 죄다 아마 부스러기만 있지 뭐예요.
그때부터 이 불쌍한 남자는 고양이 앞의 생쥐마냥 조용해졌죠. 실타래가 그리 된 게 자신의 부주의 탓인 줄로만 알고 책임이 있다고 생각했던 거지요.
이리하여 남편은 더는 아내보고 실을 만들라는 말을 하지 않게 되었답니다.
하지만 아내 분이 정말 너무 밉살스러운 거 아닌 가요! (ㅋㅋㅋ)
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「게으른 실 잣는 여인」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「게으른 실 잣는 여인」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter128.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



129. 재주가 좋은 네 형제



옛날에 네 아들들을 둔 가난한 남자가 살고 있었어요.
아들들이 자라자 그가 말했지요.
“사랑하는 아이들아, 너흰 이제 세상으로 나가야한단다, 왜냐면 너희들에게 줄 게 내겐 아무 것도 없기 때문이다. 그러니 나가거라, 부디 먼 곳에 가서 저마다 기술 하나씩 배워 각자 살 길을 마련하길 바란다.”
그래서 네 형제들이 자신들의 지팡이를 하나씩 들고서 아빠에게 작별인사를 드린 다음 함께 성문을 나섰답니다.
그들은 한참동안 함께 돌아다녔지요, 그러다 네 갈래로 갈라지는 네거리를 만나게 되었어요.
그때 큰 형이 말했어요.
“여기서 갈라지자, 하지만 4년 후에 우리 이 장소에서 다시 만나자구나, 그동안은 각자 운을 찾아보자.”
그리하여 그들이 하나씩 길을 잡고 나아갔어요.
큰 형은 “어디를 가느냐? 무엇을 배우려하느냐?”라고 묻는 남자를 만나게 되었어요.
“기술을 하나 배우고 싶어서요.”라며 그가 대꾸했어요.
그러자 상대방이 말했어요.
“그럼 나를 따라와, 도둑이 되거라.”
“아뇨,”라며 그가 대답했어요. “그건 평판 좋은 기술이 아니잖아요, 그러다 결국 교수대에 매달리면 어쩌려고요.”
“오,”라며 그 남자가 말했어요. “교수대를 두려워할 필요가 없다. 난 그냥 아무도 가질 수 없는 걸 손아귀에 쥐는 것 네게 가르치려는 것뿐이다. 게다가 아무도 너를 발견할 수 없지.”
그래서 그 말을 옳게 받아들이곤 큰 형은 그를 따라가 능란한 도둑이 되었어요. 어찌나 솜씨가 좋은지 그 무엇도 그의 손을 벗어날 수 없었죠. 만약 그가 가지려는 마음만 먹으면 말이죠.
둘째도 “세상에 나가 무얼 배우려는 게냐?”라고 묻는 남성을 만났어요.
“아작 잘 모르겠는데요.”라고 그가 대꾸했지요.
“그럼 나를 따라와, 천문학자(하늘의 현상을 연구하는 사람)가 되거라. 이만한 직업이 없지. 왜냐면 그 무엇도 네게서 숨을 수 없거든.”
그 제안이 마음에 든 둘째는 훌륭한 천문학자가 되었어요. 천문학에 관한 거라면 다 배웠지요. 그래서 세상에 나갈 때쯤 그의 스승이 그에게 만원경을 하나 주며 말했어요.
“이거 하나면 네가 하늘이든 아님 천국이든 뭐든 볼 수 있을 게다. 그 무엇도 네 눈을 피해가지 못하리라.”
사냥꾼이 기술을 배우려던 셋째를 데려고 가 잘 교육시킨 결과, 셋째는 노련한 사냥꾼이 될 수 있었답니다.
떠날 때쯤, 스승이 그에게 총을 한 자루 주며 말했어요.
“이거 한 자루면 절대 실패할 일이 없을 게다. 조준하는 모든 걸 넌 맞출 수 있을 게다.”
막내도 또한 그의 의도를 묻는 남자를 만났어요.
“재봉사가 되어보지 않으련?”라며 그가 말했지요.
“잘은 모르지만,”라며 막내가 말했어요. “아침부터 밤늦도록 한 자리에 몸을 웅크리고 앉아 앞뒤로 기우뚱거리는 거위마냥 바느질만 해대는 건 제 적성이 아닙니다.”
“오, 아니다 그건 네가 몰라서 그런다,”라며 그 남자가 말했어요. “나를 따라가면 배우는 건 아주 색다른 재봉사 일이다. 존경받고 품위 있거니와 명예로운 재봉술이지, 암.” 
그래서 스스로 설득된 막내가 그 남자를 따라가 시작부터 차근차근 재봉술을 다 배웠답니다.
헤어질 때가 되자, 그 남자는 막내에게 바늘을 하나 주며 말했어요.
“이거 하나면 넌 이제부터 뭐든지 꿰맬 수 있단다, 그게 달걀처럼 부드럽든 아니면 쇠처럼 단단하든 이 바늘이 죄다 꿰맬 수 있지, 그러고도 실밥하나 보이지 않는 단다.”
약속한 4년이 되어, 네 형제들은 네거리 바로 그 장소에 도착해, 서로 포옹도 하고 키스도 하며 행복해하다 다시 아빠의 집으로 돌아왔답니다.
“그래 이제,”라며 아바가 크게 기뻐하시며 말했어요. “바람이 너희들을 다시 내게로 인도해주었구나.”
아들들이 그동안 자신들이 겪고 배운 기술들을 아빠에게 말했어요.
그들이 집 앞 큰 나무 아래에 앉았을 때 아빠가 말했어요.
“내가 이제부터 너희들에게 시험을 하나씩 내, 너희들이 뭘 할 수 있는가 보마.”
그때 아빠가 위를 쳐다보시더니 둘째보고 말했어요.
“이 나무 꼭대기에 있는 나뭇가지 두 개 사이로 ‘되새’(참새?^^ㅋㅋ) 둥지가 하나 보이는 구나, 그 알이 모두 몇 개인지를 네가 알아맞힐 수 있겠느냐?”
천문학자가 만원경을 꺼내 위를 쳐다보더니 말했어요.
“모두 다섯 개입니다.”
그러자 아빠가 첫째에게 말했어요.
“알을 품고 있는 새가 모르도록 네가 가서 알들을 가져오려무나.”
능란한 도둑이 기어 올라가더니 새가 앉아 있는 알 다섯 개를 꺼내왔어요. 그가 그러는 대도 새는 눈치채지 못하고서 그 자리에 얌전히 않아 있었답니다.
아빠가 그걸 건네받아 식탁 네 모서리 끝에 각각 하나씩 놓고 다섯 번째 알은 식탁 한가운데에 놓으며 사냥꾼에게 말했어요.
“한 방에 이것들 다섯 알을 모두 맞출 수 있겠느냐, 그것도 모두 한 가운데를 말이다.”
사냥꾼이 조준을 하더니 아빠가 요구한 대로 알들을 한 방에 모두 관통시켜버렸어요.
식탁 모서리마다 화약 자국이 둥글게 남아 있는 걸로 봐선 그가 확실히 쏜 게 맞았거든요.
“자 이제 네 차례구나,”라며 아빠가 넷째(막내) 아들에게 말했어요. “이 모든 알들을 꿰매 원상태대로 만들어 보거라, 특히 알 안에 있던 어린 새들도 같이 꿰매 총에 맞은 흔적이 없도록 해주거라.”
재봉사가 자신의 바늘을 가지고 오더니 아빠가 원하시는 대로 그것들을 꿰맸어요.
그가 일을 다 마치자 도둑(첫째 아들)이 다시 나무 위로 올라가 둥지에 있는 새 밑에 도로 갖다놓았답니다. 물론 그러는 동안 새는 전혀 눈치 채지 못했지요.
그 새는 종일 앉아 있었지요. 그 며칠 후 어린 아기 새들이 나왔는데, 정말 목에 실밥 하나씩만 있고 모두 건강했어요. 그 실밥은 막내가 꿰맨 자국이었지요.
“잘 했구나,”라며 노인이 자신의 아들들에게 말했어요. “너희들이 여봐란 듯이 성장했단 생각이 드는 구나, 그동안 열심히 배웠음이 분명하다, 좋은 기술들을 배웠어. 다만 누가 우위인지는 모르겠다. 어서 빨리 너희들의 재능을 사용해볼 수 있는 좋은 기회가 오리라 믿는다, 그때가 되면 다 판별될 것이다.”
정말 머지않아, 나라가 발칵 뒤집혀지는 사건이 벌어졌어요. 공주님이 용에게 납치되셨지 뭐예요.
왕이 이 일로 골머리를 앓으신 나머지 밤낮으로 생각해보시다 결국 “누구든 공주를 구출해오는 자에게 공주를 아내로 주겠노라”라고 선언하기에 이르렀지요.
네 형제들이 서로 말했어요.
“이거야 말로 우리들이 무얼 할 수 있는지를 보여줄 수 있는 좋은 기회야!”
그래서 네 형제들은 그 길로 길을 떠나 공주를 구해오자는 데에 의견일치를 보았어요.
“공주님이 어디 계신지 내가 찾아볼게,”라며 천문학자가 자신의 만원경을 통해 사방을 바라보다 말했어요. “보인다, 그녀가 보여, 저 멀리 떨어진 바다 한 가운데에 있는 바위 위에 있어, 그런데 용이 그녀 옆에서 한시도 감시의 끝을 늦추지 않고 있어.”
그런 다음 그는 왕에게 가 자신과 형제들이 타고 갈 배 한 척을 요구했어요.
그들이 돛을 달고 바다를 건너 그 바위섬에 도착했어요.
공주님이 앉아 계셨지요, 물론 용이 그녀의 무릎 위에 기댄 채 자고 있었지만요.
사냥꾼이 말했어요.
“지금은 쏠 수 없어, 지금 쏘면 아름다운 아가씨도 맞게데.”
“그렇담 내 기술이 필요하겠군.”라며 도둑이 거리로 기어 올라가더니 쥐도 새도 모르게 용 밑에서 그녀를 훔쳐 데리고 내려왔어요. 괴물은 아무 것도 모르고 계속 코를 골며 자고 있었지요.
기뻐하며 그들은 서둘러 공주를 배에 태우고 드넓은 바다로 배를 움직였어요.
하지만 깨어난 용은 공주가 사라진 걸 알고는 그들을 매섭게 뒤쫓아 오며 분노로 코를 씩씩거리며 날아오며 하늘을 진동시키고 있었어요.
용이 배 위에 원을 그리며 돌더니 막 내려앉으려할 때, 사냥꾼이 어깨에 총을 올리더니 “빵!”하고 용의 심장을 쏴 맞추었어요.
괴물은 총에 맞고 쿵하고 떨어졌는데, 어찌나 커고 강력하던지 배를 그냥 산산조각내고 말았답니다.
하지만 운 좋게도 그들은 저마다 판자때기 하나씩을 부여잡고 넓은 바다 여기저기에 떠 있을 수 있었지요.
그리하여 큰 위험이 또다시 닫친 거지요.
하지만 부지런한 재봉사가 구사일생으로 자신의 바늘을 집어 난파된 판자때기들 몇 개를 다시 꿰매곤 그 위에 올라않았죠. 그가 차례차례 배의 파편들을 모아다 꿰맸어요.
그가 너무도 솜씨 좋게 한데 꿰맸기에 단시간에 배가 다시 항해를 견딜 수 있게 되었답니다. 
그래서 그들은 다시 안전하게 고국으로 돌아올 수 있었지요.
다시 한 번 자신의 딸을 만난 왕은 너무도 반가웠어요.
왕이 네 형제들에게 말했지요.
“너희들 중 한 명에게 이 애를 아내로 주마, 하지만 너희들 중 누가 이 애와 결혼할 지는 너희들이 정하거라.”
그러자 열띤 경쟁이 그들 사이에 붙어, 서로 자신이 적임자라고 자처하기에 이르렀어요.
천문학자(둘째)가 말했어요.
“만약 내가 공주님을 찾지 못했다면, 너희들의 기술들이 뭔 소용이 있었겠니, 그러니 공주는 내 꺼야.”
도둑(첫째)이 말했지요.
“만약 내가 용에게서 공주님을 구해오지 않았다면, 네가 찾은 게 무슨 소용이 있었겠니? 그러니 공주는 내 꺼야.”
사냥꾼(셋째)이 말했어요. 
“첫째 형과 공주님, 그리고 형제 다, 내가 용을 쏘아 맞추지 못했으면 용이 모두를 갈기갈기 찢어죽었을 텐데 그게 무슨 소용이 있었겠니, 그러니 공주는 내 꺼야.”
재봉사(넷째. 막내)가 말했어요.
“그럼 나는, 내 기술이 없었다면 배를 다시 꿰매지도 못했을 텐데, 그럼 모두들 물에 빠져 비참하게 죽었을 거잖아, 그러니 그녀는 내 꺼야.”
이리되자 왕이 다음과 같이 털어놨어요.
“모두가 저마다 제 역할을 다 한 것이 맞고, 또한 너희들 모두가 내 딸을 가질 수 없는 것도 맞다, 그러니 너희들 누구에게도 저 앨 주지 않겠다, 다만 대신 내 그 보답으로 내 왕국의 절반을 너희들 각자에게 나눠주마.” 
형제들이 그 결정을 크게 반기며 말했어요.
“저희들끼리 서로 다투는 것보다 그 제안이 백번 낫습니다.”
그리하여 왕국의 절반을 그들 각자가 나눠 가졌답니다. 
그들은 자신들의 아빠도 데리고 와 하느님이 주신 행복 안에서 더없이 행복하게 잘 살았다네요.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「재주가 좋은 네 형제」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「재주가 좋은 네 형제」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter129.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



130. 한눈이, 두눈이, 세눈이



옛날 옛적에 세 딸을 둔 한 여인이 있었어요.
큰딸은 이마 한 가운데에 눈이 하나만 있다고 하여 ‘한눈이’라 불렸어요.
그리고 둘째딸은 다른 사람들처럼 눈이 두 개 있다고 하여 ‘두눈이’라 불렸어요.
막내는 두  도 있고 또 이마 중앙에 눈이 하나 더 있다고 하여 ‘세눈이’라 불렸어요.
하지만 두눈이만 다른 사람들처럼 눈이 두 개다 보니, 그녀의 자매들과 엄마는 참을 수가 없었죠.
그녀들은 둘째(주인공)에게 말했어요.
“두눈이 너는, 보통 사람들과 하나도 다를 바 없어, 넌 우리 가족이 아냐!”
그녀들은 둘째를 밀치고 낡은 옷만 주었어요. 또한 자신들이 먹다 남은 음식만 둘째에게 주었답니다. 게다가 둘째를 불행하게 할 수 있는 일이라면 뭐든 했지요.
그러다 한번은 두눈이(둘째딸)가 들판으로 나가 염소를 돌봐야했지요. 자신도 여전히 배가 고픈데 말이죠. 자매들이 먹을 걸 아주 조금밖에 안 주었거든요.
그래서 두눈이가 언덕에 앉아 울기 시작했어요. 어찌나 울어대는지 눈물이 시냇물처럼 두 눈에서 흘러내렸지요.
그러다 문득 두눈이가 상심하며 올려다보니, 어떤 여인이 바로 곁에 서 있다 이렇게 말하는 거예요.
“왜 울고 있니, 귀여운 두눈아?”
두눈이가 대답했어요.
“제가 다른 사람들처럼 눈이 두 개라고, 제 자매들과 엄마가 저를 미워하고 이리 저리 밀치고 낡은 옷들을 제게 내던지고 먹다 남은 음식만 제게 주는데 제가 어찌 안 울고 베기겠어요? 오늘도 조금밖에 못 먹어서 배가 고파 우는 거예요.”
그러자 여자 마법사가 말했어요.
“두눈이, 눈물 뚝, 네가 어떻게 하면 굶주리는 고통에서 벗어날 수 있는지 가러쳐 주마. 자 네 염소에게 이렇게만 말하려무나. ‘매애(염소 울음소리), 사랑하는 염소야, 매애, 먹을 걸로 한상 차려줘.’라고 말이야. 그럼 한 상 거나하게 차려진 밥상이 네 앞에 놓여 있을 거란다. 네가 먹고 싶은 것들로 맛나게 차려진 음식상 말이야. 먹고 나면, 치울 필요 없이, 이렇게만 말하면 된단다. ‘매애, 매애, 사랑하는 염소야, 이제 식탁을 치워져.’라고 말이지. 그럼 식탁이 눈앞에서 싹 사라지고 없을 거란다.”
그 말을 남기고 여자 마법사는 사라졌니다.
두눈이가 생각했어요.
‘바로 시험해봐야지, 그분의 말씀이 참말인지 보고 싶어, 게다가 난 지금 너무 배가 고프거든.’
그래서 그녀가 말했지요.
“매애, 사랑하는 염소야, 매애, 먹을 걸로 한상 차려줘.”
그 말을 내뱉음과 동시에 새하얀 보자기가 덮인 예쁜 밥상 하나가 앞에 놓여있었어요.
밥상 위엔 나이프(칼) 하나와 포트 하나가 접시 하나와 함께 놓여 있었죠. 물론 은 스푼 하나도 있었고 말이죠. 또한 세상에서 가장 맛있는 음식이 부엌에서 막 가지고 온 거 마냥 모락모락 김을 내뿜고 있었답니다.
즉시 두눈이가 자신이 알고 있던 가장 짧은 기도문을 외웠어요.
“주님, 늘 우리와 함께 해주세요, 아멘.”
그런 다음 두눈이는 맛나게 먹었답니다.
배부르게 먹은 그녀가, 여자 마법사에게서 들은 대로, 이렇게 말했죠.
“매애, 매애, 사랑하는 염소야, 이제 식탁을 치워져.”
그 즉시 예쁜 식탁과 식탁 위에 있던 음식들이 다시 싹 사라졌지요.
“와, 살림살이에 보탬이 되는 방법인데!”라며 두눈이는 생각했어요. 스스로 생각해도 참 대견하고 행복했답니다.
저녁이 되어, 그녀가 염소를 끌고 집에 도착해보니, 작은 질그릇(진흙으로 만든 그릇)에 음식이 조금 남아있어요, 그건 그녀의 자매들이 두눈이 먹어라고 준비해놓은 거지요. 하지만 그녀는 손도 대지 않았답니다.
다음날 그녀는 자신의 염소를 데리고 다시 들판으로 나갔어요. 물론 그녀 몫인 다 부스러진 빵 조각 몇 개엔 손도 대지 않고 말이죠. 
한 번 두 번째는 그녀의 자매들도 눈치를 채지 못했답니다. 하지만 그게 매일 같이 반복되자, 그녀들도 뭔가 낌새를 채고서 말했죠.
“두눈이가 이상한데, 음식에 손도 안 되고 남겨두잖아, 주는 족족 다 먹어치우는 애가. 아무래도 다른 방법으로 음식을 얻나봐.”
진실을 파헤치지 위해, 그녀들은 두눈이가 염소를 끌고 풀밭으로 갈 때 한눈이(큰딸)를 딸려 보내기로 결심했어요.
“따라 가서 누가 두눈이한테 먹을 거나 마실 걸 갖다 주는지 잘 관찰해.” 
그렇게 다음날 두눈이가 출발하려는데, 한눈이가 오더니 말했어요.
“나도 너랑 풀밭 같이 갈려고, 네가 염소를 잘 돌보는지 먹이는 제대로 있는 곳으로 데려가는지를 봐야겠거든.”
하지만 두눈이는 대번에 한눈이의 속셈을 알아채고서, 염소를 풀이 무성한 곳으로 데리고 가 말했지요.
“자, 한눈아, 우리 여기 앉아, 내가 너를 위해 노래 하나 불러줄게.”
한눈이는 앉았어요. 하지만 익숙지 않은 걸음걸이를 한 데다 태양도 뜨겁고 해서 넘 피곤했지요.
두눈이가 계속해서 노래를 불렀어요.
“한눈아, 깼니? 한눈아, 자니?”
결국 한눈이가 자신의 한 눈을 감고 쿨쿨 잠이 들고 말았어요.
한눈이가 단단히 잠든 걸 확인한 두눈이는 이제 들통 날 염려 없이 이렇게 말했지요.
“매애, 사랑하는 염소야, 매애, 먹을 걸로 한상 차려줘.”
그녀는 밥상에 앉아 배가 찰 때까지 먹고 마신 다음 이렇게 소리쳤지요.
“매애, 매애, 사랑하는 염소야, 이제 식탁을 치워져.”
그 즉시 모든 게 싹 사라졌지요.
그제야 두눈이는 한눈이를 깨우며 말했어요.
“한눈아, 염소 돌볼 거라며, 그러려면 깨려무나, 안 그럼 그새 염소가 온천지로 뛰어다닐 수 있단다. 그럼, 이제 우리 집으로 돌아가 볼까.”
그리하여 그녀들은 집에 돌아왔어요.
또다시 두눈이는 자신의 초라한 음식엔 손도 대지 않았죠.
그녀가 먹지 않는 이유를 한눈이는 엄마에게 말씀드릴 수가 없었어요.
한눈이가 변명하며 말했어요.
“나갔을 때 깜빡 잠들었어요.”
다음날 엄마는 세눈이에게 말했어요.
“이번에 네가 따라가 보거라, 따라가서 두눈이가 뭘 먹는지, 누가 음식이나 음료수라도 가져다주는 건지 살펴 보거라. 그 애가 몰래 먹고 마시는 줄도 모르잖니.”
그래서 세눈이는 두눈이에게 가 말했어요.
“나 너 따라갈래, 네가 염소를 잘 돌보는지 그리고 풀이 있는 곳에 데려다주는지 볼 거야.”
하지만 두눈이는 세눈이의 속셈을 단박에 알아채고서 염소를 풀이 무성한 곳으로 데려고 가 말했어요.
“세눈아, 우리 여기 앉자, 네게 노래 하나 불러줄게.”
세눈이는 앉았어요. 하지만 익숙지 않은 걸음걸이를 한 데다 태양도 뜨겁고 해서 넘 피곤했지요.
그때 두눈이가 어제와 같은 노래를 부르기 시작했어요.
“세눈아, 깨어 있니?”
그럼 다음, 노래를 잠시 멈추기 이렇게 물었죠.
“세눈아, 자고 있니?”
그러다 ‘세눈이’라고 말해야 할 것을 ‘두눈이’라고 잘못 말하며 노래를 불렀죠, 생각없이 말이죠.
(두눈이의 잘못된 노래→) “누눈아, 자고 있니?”
줄곧 그 노래가 반복되었답니다.
“세눈아, 깨어 있니? 두눈아, 자고 있니?”
세눈이의 세 눈들 중 두 눈은 감긴 채 잠들어 있었지만, 세 번째 눈은 노래가사로 자신이 호명되지 않았기에 잠을 안자고 있었죠.
분위기를 파악한 영악한 세눈이가 자는 척 연기하며 세 번째 눈을 감았어요. 하지만 눈을 가늘게 뜨고서 두눈이를 관찰하고 있었죠. 가늘게 뜬 눈으로도 볼 건 다 보니까요.
그렇게 세눈이가 쿨쿨 잠든 것으로 착각한 두눈이가 마법의 주문을 말했답니다.
“매애, 사랑하는 염소야, 매애, 먹을 걸로 한상 차려줘.”
그런 다음 그녀는 양껏 먹고 싶은 대로 먹고 마신 다음, 밥상보고 사라져 달라 주문을 외웠죠.
“매애, 매애, 사랑하는 염소야, 이제 식탁을 치워져.”
그걸 세눈이는 모두 지켜보았답니다.
그때 두눈이가 세눈이에게 가 깨우며 말했어요. 
“잘 잤니, 세눈아? 오늘 염소 잘 돌봤어! 자, 우리 그만 집으로 돌아갈까.”
그녀들이 집에 도착했을 때, 두눈이는 이번에도 음식엔 손도 대지 않았죠.
세눈이가 엄마에게 말했어요.
“저 건방진 것이 먹지 앟는 이유를 알았어, 엄마. 들에 갔을 때, 저 애가 염소에게 이렇게 말했어. ‘매애, 사랑하는 염소야, 매애, 먹을 걸로 한상 차려줘.’라고. 그러고 나면 한상 가득 잘 차려진 밥상이 앞에 나타났어. 우리가 먹는 것보다 훨씬 더 좋고 맛난 음식들이었단 말이야. 그걸 원 것 다 먹고 나선, 저 것이 이렇게 말했어. ‘매애, 매애, 사랑하는 염소야, 이제 식탁을 치워져.’ 그랬더니 모든 게 싹 사라지는 거야. 이 모든 걸 내 눈들로 똑똑히 다 봤다니까. 특정한 단어들이 반복되는 노래가사를 불러 내 두 눈을 닫게 만들었지만, 운 좋겠도 내 이마에 있던 이 세 번째 눈만은 깨어 있었거든.”
샘이 잔뜩 난 엄마가 소리쳤어요.
“뭐가 어쩌고 어째, 우리가 먹는 것보다 더 잘 먹더라고? 내 이 요망한 것을 당장 아작(작살)을 내줄테다.”
그러더니 그녀는 가서 소 잡는 칼을 가져오더니 그 염소의 심장을 찔러버렸어요. 그 바람에 염소가 쓰러져 죽고 말았죠.
이 광경을 본 두눈이(둘째딸. 주인공)는 기겁을 한 나머지 들판 잔디밭 끝까지 달려가 주저 않아 펑펑 울고 있었어요.
그 순간 여자 마법사가 한 번 더 그녀 옆에 자리해 있다 말했어요.
“그래 두눈아, 왜 그리 울고 있는 거니?”
“제가 안 울게 생겼나요?”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “매일 같이 제가 주문만 외우면 저를 위해 밥상을 차려주던 염소를 제 엄마가 죽였는데요, 이제 전 다시 쫄쫄 굶게 생겼어요.(ㅜ_ㅜ)”
여자 마법사가 말했어요.
“두눈아, 내가 조언 하나 해주마. 네 자매들에게 부탁해서 죽은 그 염소의 내장을 달라고 해 대문 앞 땅에 묻으려무나, 그럼 그게 네게 행운을 가져다 줄거란다.”
그런 다음 그녀는 사라졌어요.
그래서 두눈이가 집으로 와 자매들에게 말했어요.
“사랑하는 자매들아, 내 염소를 좀 줄래, 좋은 고기 부위 말고, 그냥 내장만 좀 주면 돼.”
그녀들이 비웃으며 말했어요.
“원하는 게 까짓 그거라면 못 줄 거도 없지, 자.”
그렇게 내장을 건네받은 두눈이가 저녁에 조용히 대문 앞에 염소의 내장을 먿었지요. 여자 마법사가 그녀에게 조언한 대로 말이죠.
다음날 아침 그녀들이 깨어나 대문으로 가 보니 낯선 나무가 웅장하게 하나 서 있는데, 그 나무는 은빛 잎사귀들과 황금 열매를 주렁주렁 매달고 있어, 세상 천지에 이보다 귀하고 아름다운 나무가 또 있을까 싶을 정도였지요.
그녀들로선 하룻밤 사이에 이 나무가 도대체 어떻게 생기게 되었는지 몰랐지만, 두눈이만은 그게 염소의 내장에서 자란 나무란 것을 알 수 있었죠. 왜냐면 그녀가 내장을 묻었던 정확히 그 장소에 나무가 자라 있었거든요.
그때 엄마가 한눈이에게 말했어요.
“얘, 네가 한 번 올라가, 우리가 먹을 과일을 좀 따오려무나.”
한눈이가 올라갔어요, 하지만 황금 사과들 중 하나를 막 따려고 하면 나뭇가지들이 그녀의 손을 피하는 바람에 매번 허탕만 쳤죠. 그래서 그녀는 사과를 하나도 못 따고 말았답니다. 
그러자 엄마가 말했어요.
“세눈아, 이번에 네가 한 번 올라가 봐라, 넌 눈이 세 개니 한눈이보단 잘 볼 수 있을 거 아니니.”
한눈이가 내려오자, 세눈이가 올라가봤어요.
하지만 세눈이도 별반 다를 게 없었죠. 먹음직한 걸 따려고 하면 황금 사과들이 쏙쏙 잘도 그녀의 손을 피해갔으니까요.
마침내 성질머리가 난 엄마가 직접 올라가 사과를 따려고 시도해보았지만, 그녀는 차라리 한눈이와 세눈이보다 훨씬 더 했죠. 잡으려던 사과는 못 잡고 허공만 매번 움켜쥘 뿐이었으니까요.
그때 두눈이가 말했어요.
“제가 한 번 올라가볼게요, 저는 성공할 수 있을 거 같아요.”
자매들이 아우성쳤어요.
“꼴에 자존심은 있어가지고, 그래 두 눈으로 뭘 할 수 있다고 나서니?”
하지만 두눈이가 올라가니 황금 사과들이 너도 나도 저절로 그녀의 손에 잡혀줬어요. 그래서 그녀는 하나씩 차례차례 따서 앞주머니를 가득 채울 수 있었죠.
그녀가 내려오자마자 엄마는 칭찬 대신 냉큼 그녀에게서 사과를 빼앗아버렸어요. 이제 엄마와 한눈이 그리고 세눈이에게 남은 건 정말 시기심뿐이었지요. 왜냐면 두눈이만이 열매를 딸 수 있다는 것이 증명되었으니 열불이 난 그녀들은 전보다 더 가혹하게 두눈이를 괴롭혔답니다.
그런 일이 있고 한 번은 우연히도 그녀들이 모두 나무 옆에 서 있는데, 어느 젊은 기사분이 말을 타고 다가오시는 거예요.
“두눈이 너, 어서,”라며 두 자매들이 소리쳤어요. “이 밑으로 기어들어가 있어, 까불지 말고!”
그녀들은 나무 가까이에 놓여 있던 빈 통으로 가련한 두눈이를 덮어버렸어요. 그녀들은 또한 두눈이가 딴 황금 사과들도 그 통 속에 밀어넣어버렸죠.
가까이 다가온 기사분을 자세히 보니 그는 잘생긴 영주(영토의 주인)님이셨어요. 그는 멈추고 서서는 황금빛과 은빛이 알록달록한 그 나무를 경이로운 듯 바라보았어요.
그가 두 자매에게 말했어요.
“이 훌륭한 나무는 누구 건가요? 제게 나뭇가지 하나만 따 주시면, 그 보답으로 바라시는 건 뭐든 들어드리리다.”
한눈이와 세눈이가 대꾸했어요. 
“이 나무는 저희들 나무에요, 저희가 따 드릴게요.”
하지만 그녀 둘 다 큰 어려움을 겪으며 결국 나뭇가지 따는데 실패하고 말았죠. 그녀들이 손을 뻗을 때마다 나뭇가지며 열매들이 쏙쏙 피해다녔으니까요.
그때 기사분이 말했어요.
“당신들 나무라면서 그거 하나 못 꺾으시니 그 참 이상하네요.”
그녀들은 다시 한 번 “이 나무는 저희 소유가 맞아요.”라며 강력히 항의하고 나섰어요.
그녀들이 그렇게 말하는 사이, 두눈이가 황금 사과 두서너 개를 통에서부터 기사의 발로 굴러보냈어요. 왜냐면 두눈이는 한눈이와 세눈이가 진실을 말하지 않는데 애가 탔기 때문이지요.
그 사과들을 본 기사분이 흠칫 놀라하며 “이 사과는 어디서 난 겁니까?”라고 물었어요.
한누이와 세눈이는 “저희들에게는 또 한 명의 자매가 있는데. 눈이 보통 사람들처럼 두 개라 앞에 나서는 걸 허락받지 못한 애에요.”라고 대답했지요.
하지만 기사분은 간절히 그녀를 보기를 바라며 외쳤지요.
“두눈이, 어서 나와요.”
그때 두눈이가 아주 침착하게 통 아래에서 나왔답니다.
그녀의 미모가 어찌나 출중했던지 기사분은 깜짝 놀라고 말았답니다. 
기사분이 말했어요.
“당신이, 당신이 두눈이이오, 혹시 저를 위해 이 나무의 가지 하나만 꺾어다줄 수 있겠소.”
“그럼요,”라며 두눈이가 대꾸했어요. “그래드리고 말고요, 이 나무는 제 거인걸요.”
그녀는 나무에 오르더니 금방 아름다운 은빛 잎사귀와 황금 열매가 달린 나뭇가지 하나를 꺾어가지고 내려와 기사분께 드렸어요.
그러자 기사분이 말했어요.
“두눈이, 제가 이 보답으로 무얼 해드리면 좋으시겠습니까?”
“아아!”라며 두눈이가 대답했어요. “전 지금 배고픔 목마름 슬픔과 결핍으로 이른 아침부터 밤 늦도록 고통받고 있어요. 그러니 부디 당신이 저를 데려가주세요. 저를 여기서 구해주세요. 저도 행복해지고 싶어요.”
기사분이 두눈이를 들어 올려 자신의 말에 태우곤 자신의 아빠가 계신 성으로 데려갔어요. 거기서 그는 그녀에게 아름다운 옷들을 주고, 그녀가 원 것 고기와 음료수를 먹을 수 있게 해주었어요.
그리고 그녀를 아주 많이 사랑한 그는 그녀와 결혼을 하였답니다. 결혼식은 정말이지 성대하게 거행되었죠.
잘생긴 기사가 두눈이를 데려갈 때, 두 자매들은 두눈이의 행운에 노골적인 반감을 드러내며 말했더랬지요.
“그치만 우리에겐 아직 이 경이로운 나무가 남아 있으니까.”
그녀들은 생각했지요.
“이 나무만 있음 비록 우리가 열매를 못 딴다 해도 언젠가 다시 잘생긴 기사분이 멈추어 서서 이 나무를 감탄해마지 않을 거고 그러다 우리들도 눈에 띄게 될 거라고. 그럼 누가 알겠어, 복이 넝쿨째 우리에게도 굴러들어올지?”
하지만 다음날 아침 그 나무는 깜쪽같이 사라지고 없었어요. 그 바람에 그녀들의 모든 희망도 물거품이 되고 말았죠.
그때 두눈이는 자신의 예쁜 방 창문을 내다보다 그 나무가 창문 앞에 서 있는 것을 보고 너무도 기뻤어요.
맞아요, 그 나무가 그녀를 따라왔던 거예요.
오랜세월 두눈이는 그렇게 행복하게 살았답니다.
그러다 한 번은 가난한 여인 두 명이 성에 와 구걸을 하였어요.
두눈이가 그녀들의 얼굴을 들여다보니 그건 바로 자신의 자매들이었어요.
네 맞아요, 한눈이와 세눈이에게는 모진 가난이 닫쳐 이리저리 방랑하며 이 집 저 집에서 먹을 걸 구걸할 수밖에 없었던 거예요.
하지만 두눈이는 진심으로 그들을 환영해주고 상냥하게 대해주고 돌봐주었답니다.
그리하여 그 두 사람들도 자신들이 젊은 시설에 자매에게 했던 악행에 대해 진심으로 누의칠 수 있었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「한눈이, 두눈이, 세눈이」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「한눈이, 두눈이, 세눈이」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter130.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



131. 예쁜 카트리넬리에와 핍 팝 폴트리



“안녕하세요, 홀렌테 아버님.”
“그래 안녕한가, 핍 팝 폴트리.”
“따님을 제게 주실 수 있으신가요?”
“오, 그야 물론, 만약 엄마 ‘젖소’와, 오빠 ‘배부른 소리’와, 여동생 ‘흉물이 없는’과, 예쁜 ‘카트리넬리에’가 허락한다면 내 기꺼이 그 애를 주겠네.”
“그럼, 어머님 ‘젖소’는 어디 계시죠?”
“그녀는 외양간에서 우유를 짜고 있을 걸세.”
“안녕하세요, 젖소 어머님.”
“그래 안녕한가, 핍 팝 폴트리.”
“따님을 제게 주시겠어요?”
“오, 그야 물론이지, 만약 아빠 ‘홀렌테’와, 오빠 ‘배부른 소리’와, 여동생 ‘흉물이 없는’과, 예쁜 ‘카트리넬리에’가 허락한다면 내 기꺼이 그 애를 주겠네.”
“그럼, 오빠 ‘배부른 소리’는 어디 계신가요?”
“그 애는 방에서 땔감을 자르고 있을 걸세.”
“안녕하세요, 오빠 ‘배부른 소리’님.”
“그래 안녕한가, 핍 팝 폴트리.”
“여동생을 제게 주실 수 있으세요?”
“오, 그야 물론, 만약 아빠 ‘홀렌테’와, 엄마 ‘젖소’와, 여동생 ‘흉물이 없는’과, 예쁜 ‘카트리넬리에’가 허락한다면 내 기꺼이 그 애를 주겠네.”
“그럼, 여동생 ‘흉물이 없는’은 어디 있죠?”
“그 애는 지금 정원에서 양배추를 썰고 있네.”
“안녕, 여동생 ‘흉물이 없는’아.”
“네 안녕하신가요, 핍 팝 폴트리.”
“네 언니를 내게 주겠니?”
“오, 그야 물론이지요, 만약 아빠 ‘홀렌테’와, 엄마 ‘젖소’와, 오라버니 ‘배부른 소리’와, 예쁜 ‘카트리넬리에’ 언니가 허락한다면 전 기꺼이 언니를 드릴 거예요.”
“그럼 예쁜 ‘카트리넬리에’는 어디 있니?”
“언니는 지금 방에서 자신의 은화를 세고 있어요.”
“안녕하세요, 예쁜 ‘카트리넬리에’.”
“네 안녕하세요, 핍 팝 폴트리.”
“내 새색시가 되어주겠소?”
“오, 그야 물론이지요, 만약 아빠 ‘홀렌테’와, 엄마 ‘젖소’와, 오라버니 ‘배부른 소리’와, 여동생 ‘흉물이 없는’이 허락해준다면 전 기꺼이 준비가 되어 있어요.”
“그래 예쁜 ‘카트리넬리에’, 결혼지참금은 얼마나 가지고 있소?”
“돈으론 은화 14개가 있고요, 빚이 청동화로 6개예요. 그리고 말린 사과 200그램과, 튀긴 빵이 한 움큼, 양념이 한 움큼이에요. 그밖에 다른 것들도 많아요. 이만하면 괜찮은 결혼지참금이지 않나요?”
(예쁜 ‘카트리넬리에’의 대사 계속→) “그런데 핍 팝 폴트리, 당신의 직업은 무엇인가요? 재봉사이신가요?”
“그보다 더 좋은 거요.”
“그럼 구두 만드는 사람이신가요?”
“그보다 더 좋은 거요.”
“농사꾼?”
“그보다 더 좋은 거요.”
“가구장이?”
“그보다 더 좋은 거요.”
“대장장이?”
“그보다 더 좋은 거요.”
“방앗간 주인?”
“그보다 더 좋은 거요.”
“아하 그럼 빗자루 만드시는 분이시구나?”
“그렇소, 그게 내 직업이오. 이만하면 괜찮은 직업이지 않소?”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「예쁜 카트리넬리에와 핍 팝 폴트리」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「예쁜 카트리넬리에와 핍 팝 폴트리」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter131.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



132. 여우와 말



어느 농부에게 충직한 말이 있었어요. 그런데 그 말이 나이 들어 더는 일을 할 수 없게 되었지요. 그래서 주인이 더는 먹이를 안 주려고 이렇게 말했어요.
“네가 더는 쓸모가 없는데 돌봐주는 게 의미가 있나 싶다. 다만 네가 사자를 여기 데려올 정도로 강하다는 걸 증명하면 내 너를 계속 보살피마. 하지만 그러기 전엔 썩 내 외양간에서 나가거라.”
이리하여 말은 넓은 들판으로 내쫓겼어요.
슬픈 말은 숲으로 들어가 날씨를 피할 작은 은신처를 찾았죠.  
그때 여우와 마주쳤는데, 여우가 이렇게 말했어요.
“왜 그렇게 고개를 떨어뜨리고 울상이야, 그리고 왜 혼자 온 거니?”
“아아,”라며 말이 대꾸했어요. “인색함과 충성심은 한 집에서 함께 지낼 수 없나봐. 글쎄 내 주인이 그동안 내가 저를 위해 수년간 해준 일들은 싹 다 잊고 내가 더는 쟁기를 끌 수 없다며 먹이를 주기 싫어 내쫓아버렸지 뭐니.”
“한 번의 기회라도 주지 않고?”라며 여우가 물었어요.
“기회는 무슨. 그가 말하길, 내가 사자 한 마리를 끌고 올 정도로 강하다면 그럼 나를 계속 돌봐주겠다네, 하지만 내가 그럴 수 없다는 건 그가 더 잘 알지.”
여우가 말했어요.
“내가 도와줄게. 넌 여기 가만히 드러누워 있어봐. 죽은 듯이 팔다리를 쭉 뻗고 꼼짝 말고 있어봐.”
말이 여우가 하란 대로 했지요.
여우는 사자에게 갔어요. 그의 굴이 멀지 않았거든요.
여우가 말했어요.
“죽은 말이 저기 밖에 누워 있는데 저랑 같이 가시죠, 그럼 풍성한 식사를 하실 수 있으세요.”
사자가 그와 함께 갔어요. 
둘이 말 옆에 섰을 때 여우가 말했지요.
“우선, 여기서 드시긴 불편하실 테니, 제가 이걸 제 꼬리에 묶어 당신의 굴까지 끌고가 드릴게요. 거기서 편히 드세요.”
그 제안이 무척 마음에 든 사자가 드러누웠답니다. 그 사이에 여우가 말을 묶을 수 있도록 하려고요. 사자는 기다리며 가만히 있었죠. 하지만 여우는 말의 꼬리로 그 사자의 다리들에 묶어버렸어요. 다리를 죄다 감고 묶고 해 단단히 동여맸기에 힘으로도 절대 끊을 수 없게 말이죠.
일을 마치자 여우가 말 어깨를 톡톡 치며 말했어요.
“잡아당겨, 흰 말아, 잡아당기라고.”
그러자 말이 벌떡 일어서며 사자를 끌고 출발했어요.
사자가 으르렁거리며 포효하기 시작하는 바람에 숲에 있던 모든 새들이 화들짝 놀라 날아가 버렸지만, 말은 사자가 그러거나 말거나 끌고 또 끌며 들판을 지나 주인의 문앞에까지 도착을 했답니다.
사자를 본 주인은 보다 나은 사람이 되어 말에게 말했어요.
“계속 내 곁에 머물며 편히 지내게 해주마.”
그리하여 말은 죽을 때까지 마음껏 먹으며 지낼 수 있었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「여우와 말」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「여우와 말」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter132.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



133. 춤추는 열두 공주
(원래제목 : 춤추느라 다 떨어진 구두)






옛날에 열두 딸들을 둔 왕이 살고 있었어요. 공주님들은 저마다 각각 너무도 예뻤답니다.
그녀들은 모두 한 방에서 잠을 잤는데, 침대가 나란히 붙어 있었죠, 매일 밤 그녀들이 들어가면 왕은 문을 꼭 잠그고 빗장을 걸었지요.
하지만 아침이 되어 왕이 다시 문을 열어보면, 그녀들의 구두가 춤을 춘 마냥 낡아있었어요. 아무도 이게 어찌된 영문인가를 몰랐죠.
급기야 왕은 누구든 공주들이 밤에 어디로 춤을 추러 가는지를 알려주는 자에겐 그녀들 중 한 명을 아내로 줄 것이며 자신의 사후에는 왕국도 물려주겠노라 선포하기에 이르렀지요.
하지만 3일 밤낮이 지나도록 알아맞히지 못하는 자는 목을 베어버리겠다 말했답니다.
머지않아 왕자님 한 분이 도착해서는 자신이 한 번 그 수수께끼를 풀어보겠노라 말했어요.
그는 환대를 받고, 저녁엔 공주님들의 침실과 바로 인접한 방으로 안내되었죠.
거기 있는 침대에 위치한 채 왕자는 공주들이 어디로 나가고 어디로 춤을 추러 가는지 그리고 몰래 딴 장소로 가진 않는지를 세밀히 살폈어요. 그녀들의 침실 문도 열어놓은 채로 말이죠.
하지만 왕자의 두 눈꺼풀이 어찌나 무거워지는지 그만 잠이 들고 말았답니다. 아침이 돼서 일어나보니 열두 공주는 이미 춤을 추러 다녀온 상태였고 그녀들의 구두들 또한 밤새 춤을 추었는지 구멍이 나 있었답니다.
두 번째 밤에도, 그리고 세 번째 밤에도 똑같은 일이 발생했어요.
그 후 왕자의 머리는 무자비하게 잘려져 버렸답니다.
이후 수많은 남자들이 와서 시험에 착수했지만 모두 하나같이 목이 잘리고 말았죠.
때마침 부상을 당해 더는 군복무를 할 수 없어 제대하게 된 가난한 병사 한 명이 왕이 사는 이 곳 도시로 향하는 길로 접어들게 되었어요.
그는 어느 노파를 한 명 만났는데, 그녀가 “어디로 가느냐?”라고 묻기에, “낸들 아요.(저인들 알겠습니까.)”라고 그가 대답하며 냉소 가득 이런 말을 덧붙였어요. “이 참에 춤 추느라 구두에 구멍이 뚫린다는 그 공주들의 비밀이나 캐 왕이나 되 볼까.”
“어려울 거 없지.”라며 그 노파가 말했어요. “넌 밤에 가져다주는 포도주만 마시지 않음 된다. 그 후 자는 척만 하면 돼지.”
그러면서 그녀가 초라한 망토를 그에게 주며 말했어요. 
“보기엔 이래도 이걸 걸친 자는 보이지 않는다. 이걸 입고 열두 공주를 몰래 뒤따라갈 수 있지.”
병사가 이 좋은 충고를 유념하고 받아들여 열심히 걷고 또 걸어 왕에게 가 자신도 구혼자 반열에 들겠다고 말했어요.
그도 다른 구혼자들처럼 환대를 받았고, 왕족의 옷이 지급되었답니다. 
저녁 취침시간이 되어 그가 인접 방으로 들어 막 침대로 드니, 첫째 공주가 포도주 한 잔을 가지다주는 거예요.
그래서 그가 자신의 턱 밑에 스펀지를 대고 포도주를 죄다 거기로 흘려버리고 한 모금도 입에 대지 않았어요.
그런 다음 그는 드러누워 잠시 자는 것 같더니 마치 깊은 잠에 빠진 듯 이내 쿨쿨 코를 곯기 시작했지요.
열두 공주들이 그 소리를 듣곤 비웃었어요.
첫째 공주가 말했어요.
“제 목숨이 아깝지 않은 게지.”
그와 동시에 그녀들이 일어나 옷장과 벽장과 찬장들을 열곤 예쁜 드레스들을 꺼내 거울 앞에 입어보며 이리 저리 뛰어보기도 하고 춤을 추는 흉내를 내며 좋아라했어요.
막내 공주만 이렇게 말했어요.
“어쩐담, 행복한데, 뭔가 불안해. 불행이 덮칠 거 같아.”
“항상 겁먹은 병아리(원문→거위)마냥 왜 그래.”라며 첫째 공주가 말했어요. “그동안 수많은 왕자들이 여길 왔었지만 모두 허사였던 걸 잊었니? 오늘 저 병사에게 잠자는 물약을 줄 필요도 없던 거였어, 어릿광대와 와도 그를 못 깨울 걸.”
준비를 마친 그녀들이 다시 한 번 병사를 살펴보았죠, 하지만 그는 눈꺼풀을 꼭 닫은 채 꿈쩍도 하지 않았죠. 그래서 그녀들은 안전하다 느꼈어요.
첫 번째 공주가 자기 침대로 가 톡톡 두드리자 즉시 침대가 땅으로 꺼졌어요.
그녀들은 한 명씩 그 열린 공간으로 뛰어내렸답니다. 물론 첫 번째 공주가 제일 먼저 뛰어내렸죠.
이 광경을 다 지켜보고 있던 병사도 머뭇거리지 않고 자신의 작은 망토를 입곤 막내 공주 다음으로 뛰어내렸어요.
계단을 반쯤 내려왔을 때 그가 그만 막내 공주의 드레스를 아주 살짝 밟고 말았어요.
그녀가 소스라치게 놀라며 외쳤어요.
“뭐야? 누가 내 드레스를 당겨?”
“어리석은 소리 하지마!”라며 첫 번째 공주가 말했어요. “못에 걸린 거겠지.”
그런 다음 그녀들이 계속 계단을 내려와 바닥에 닿으니 거기에 놀랍도록 아름다운 가로수 길 하나가 서 있었어요.
가로수 나뭇잎들이 죄다 은색으로 환히 빛나며 반짝이고 있었죠.
병사가 생각했어요.
“증거로 하나 꺾어가야지.”
그가 나뭇가지를 하나 부러뜨리자 나무에서 “딱”하며 부서지는 소리가 났어요.
막내 공주가 다시 소리쳤어요.
“뭔가 잘못됐나봐, 방금 부서지는 소리 들었지?”
하지만 첫 번째 공주가 말했어요. 
“축포 소리야, 왕자님들이 우릴 환영하는.”
그 후 그들은 이번엔 온통 금빛 나뭇잎들이 달린 가로수 길로 진입했고, 그 다음으로는 온통 다이아몬드 빛깔인 나뭇잎들이 달린 가로수 길로 진입했어요.
병사가 가로수 길 각각마다 나뭇가지를 하나씩 꺾었는데, 그럴 때마다 “딱”하고 놀라운 소리가 나 막내 공주가 화들짝 놀라며 뒤를 돌아보았고 첫 번째 공주는 그게 왕자님들의 축포소리라 말하며 안심시켰지요.
그들이 계속 앞으로 앞으로 나아가자 드디어 큰 호수 하나가 나오고, 그 호수 위에 열두 대의 보트가 떠 있는데, 그 보트 하나하나마다 잘생긴 왕자님들이 앉아서 열두 공주님들을 기다리고 있었어요.
열두 공주님들이 저마다 자신의 왕자님이 탄 보트에 올라탔어요. 병사는 막내 공주가 탄 보트에 올라탔어요. 
그때 그녀(막내 공주)의 왕자가 말했어요.
“오늘은 차마 보트가 훨씬 더 무겁단 말은 못하겠는데… 건너려면 힘껏 노를 저어야겠어.”
“아마,”라며 막내공주가 말했어요. “더운 날씨 탓이 아닐까요? 제가 지금 무척 덥거든요.”
호수 맞은편엔 웅장하고 빛나는 성이 하나 서 있고, 즐거운 트럼펫과 드럼 소리들이 온 누리에 퍼지고 있었어요.
그들이 보트를 거기 대고 성으로 입장했어요. 
왕자님들은 저마다 자신들이 사랑하는 공주님들과 춤을 추었고, 병사도 보이지 않은 채로 그들과 함께 춤을 추었지요. 
공주님들 중 한 분이라도 포도주 잔을 손에 쥐면 그가 날쌔게 마셔버려 잔이 텅 비는 바람에 공주님들이 실제 입에 대시는 포도주는 하나도 없었답니다.
이에 막내 공주님이 경계심을 드러냈지만 이번에도 첫 번째 공주가 막내를 입 다물게 했지요.
그녀들은 새벽 3시 자신들의 구두가 다 헤져 구멍이 날 때까지 춤을 추었어요. 구두에 구멍이 났기에 이제 그녀들도 어쩔 수 없이 떠나야했어요. 
왕자님들이 그녀들을 다시 호수 너머로 데려다주었어요. 병사는 이번엔 첫 번째 공주가 탄 보트에 몸을 실었어요.
호숫가에 닿자 그녀들은 왕자님들과 다음 날에도 오기로 약조를 하고 해어졌답니다.
그녀들이 그 계단에 도착했을 때 병사는 앞서 뛰어올라가서 침대에 드러누웠어요.
열두 공주들이 느리게 그리고 지쳐서 계단을 다 올라왔을 때에도 병사는 여전히 코를 “드르렁드르렁” 곯고 있었지요. 
그 소리를 들은 공준미들이 말했어요. 
“그에 관한 한 안심해도 돼.”
그녀들은 아름다운 드레스를 벗은 다음 따로 넣은 다음, 다 떨어진 구두들은 침대 밑에 넣고는 잠이 들었어요.
다음날 아침 병사는 말하지 않기로 작정했어요, 왜냐면 이 경이로운 광경을 그녀들과 함께 좀 더 지켜보고 싶었기 때문이지요.
그 다음날도 모든 것이 첫 번째 날과 같이 일어났답니다.
그녀들은 구두가 다 헤질 때까지 왕자님들과 춤을 추었죠.
하지만 셋째 날 병사는 증거로 제출하기 위해 잔(포도주 잔)을 하나 들고 왔답니다.
대답을 해야 하는 시간이 왔을 때, 병사가 그 세 가지 나뭇가지들과 잔을 들고서 왕에게 갔어요.
그때 열두 공주들은 문 뒤에 서서 병사가 무슨 말을 하나 엿듣고 있었죠.
왕이 질문을 했어요.
“그래 내 열두 딸들이 어디서 춤을 추었기에 밤새 구두가 다 헤어졌다는 거야?”
그가 대답했어요.
“열두 공주님들은 땅속 성에 가셨던 것입니다.”라며 병사는 그동안 있었을 일들을 죄다 말씀드리고 증거물들도 내밀었지요.
그래서 왕은 자신의 딸들을 불러 “방금 그가 한 얘기가 사실이냐?”라고 물었고, 사실이 다 드러났다고 본 그녀들은 더 이상 변명해봤자 소용없다 생각하고서 모든 걸 고백하기에 이르렀지요.
그 후 즉시 왕이 병사에게 “내 딸들 중 누굴 아내로 삼고 싶은가?”라고 물었어요.
그가 대답했어요.
“저도 더는 어리지 않으니 첫째 따님을 제게 주십시오.”
그리하여 그날 바로 결혼식이 거행되었고, 왕은 자기 사후에 왕국도 그에게 물려주겠다고 약속했지요.
하지만 왕자님들은 열두 공주들과 밤새 춤을 추었던 날들과 동일한 ‘일수’(날짜 수)동안 넋이 나가 버렸답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「춤추는 열두 공주 (춤추느라 다 떨어진 구두)」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「춤추는 열두 공주 (춤추느라 다 떨어진 구두)」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter133.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



134. 여섯 명의 하인



옛날에 여자 마법사인 늙은 왕비가 한 명 살고 있었어요, 그녀의 딸은 하늘 아래 최고의 미녀였지요.
하지만 늙은 여인네는 순진한 인간들을 현혹해 해칠 생각뿐이었지요. 
그래서 구혼자들이 나타날 때마다, “내 딸을 가지고 싶음 내가 내는 과제를 먼저 풀어야 한다, 못 풀면 죽음이다.”라고 말했지요.
많은 사람들이 딸의 미모에 혹해 위험을 자처하고 나섰지만 노파도 만만치 않아 아무도 그 과제를 풀 수 없었답니다. 자비는 없었죠. 죄다 무릎을 꿇곤 목이 달아났답니다.
어떤 왕자가 아가씨의 미모에 관한 소문을 듣곤 아빠에게 말했어요.
“아부지, 저도 가 볼래요. 그녀와 결혼하고 싶어요.”
“안 된다,”라며 왕이 말했어요. “네가 가봐야 목숨만 잃을 뿐이다.”
이때부터 아들은 앓아눕기 시작해 거의 7년을 끙끙 앓았답니다. 어떤 의사도 그의 병을 고칠 수 없었죠.
모든 희망이 빛을 바래자 왕도 무거운 마음을 뒤로하고 아들에게 말했지요.
“그래 가 보거라, 가서 네 운을 한 번 시험해보아라, 아무리 생각해도 그 방법뿐인 거 같구나.”
그 말을 들은 아들이 침대에서 벌떡 일어나며 다시 기운이 팔팔해져 힘차게 여행을 출발했죠.
그렇게 말을 타고서 황야를 한참 지나고 있는데, 저기 앞에 큰 건초더미 한 무더기가 땅에 놓여 있는 거 같은 게 보이지 뭐예요, 왕자가 더 가까이 다가가보니, 그건 바닥에 드러누워 있던 어느 남자의 배(복부)였어요. 배가 남산만 해 보였던 거지요.
여행객을 본 뚱보가 일어서며 말했어요.
“사람 필요하면 날 데려가슈.”
왕자가 말했어요.
“이리 뚱뚱하신 분이 무엇을 할 수 있다고요?”
“얼씨구,”라며 뚱보가 말했어요. “이게 다가 아녀, 나로 말할 거 같음, 팔다리를 쭉쭉 펴면, 지금보다 3천 배는 더 몸집을 불릴 수 있다오.”
“그렇다면야,”라며 왕자가 말했어요. “쓸모가 있겠죠, 저를 따라오세요.”
그리하여 뚱보 한 명이 왕자가 따라 잠시 더 가는데 이번엔 어떤 남성 하나가 바닥에 누운 채로 귀를 바닥에다 대고 있지 뭐예요.
“거기서 뭐하시는 거죠?”라며 왕자가 말했어요.
“엿듣고 있는 중이오.”라며 그 남자가 대답했어요.
“뭘 그리 열심히도 듣고 계신가요?”
“세상 돌아가는 소리지, 내 귀엔 다 들리거든, 난 풀이 자라는 소리도 들을 수 있다오.”
“그렇담,”라며 왕자가 말했어요. “아름다운 딸을 둔 늙은 왕비의 궁전에서 나는 소리도 들을 수 있나요.”
그러자 그가 대답했어요. “구혼자 한 놈의 목이 막 달아나려는 참이군, 칼을 휙휙 돌리는 걸 보니 말이야.”
왕자가 말했어요.
“당신도 도움 되겠는걸, 나랑 함께 갑시다.”
그들이 쭉 앞으로 가는데 어째 발 한 짝만 보이고 좀 더 쭉 가보니 나머지 발 한 짝이 또 보이는데 도무지 몸통이 보이지 않는 거예요.
그들이 한참을 더 걸어가 보니 몸통이 나오고 좀 더 가니 머리가 나왔어요.
“우와,”라며 왕자가 말했어요. “정말 키 크시네!”
“오,”라며 키다리가 말했어요. “그게 다가 아니오, 내가 팔다리를 다 쭉쭉 펴면, 지금보단 3천 배는 더 키가 더 커져선 지상에서 가장 높은 산보다 더 키가 커진다오. 내 도움을 받고 싶음, 나를 데려가시구려.”
“따라오세요,”라며 왕자가 말했어요. “당신도 유용할 거 같으니까요.”
그들이 앞으로 쭉 가니 어떤 남자가 길 가 옆에 앉아있는데 두 눈에 안대(천 조각)를 차고 있지 뭐예요.
왕자가 그에게 말을 걸었지요.
“눈이 약하신가 보네요, 낮엔 안 보이시나 봐요?”
“그게 아니라오,”라며 그 사내가 말했어요. “이 안대를 떼면 내 시선이 가 닿는 무엇이든 산산이 부서지기 때문이오. 내 눈의 섬광(힐끗 봄)은 매우 강력하다오. 내가 유용할 거 같음, 내 기꺼이 당신과 함께 가주리다.”
“저랑 갑시다,”라며 왕자가 말했어요. “당신도 유용할 거 같아요.”
그들이 앞으로 쭉 더 가니, 어떤 사내 하나가 땡볕에 있는데 몸이 와들와들 떨려 그의 손발이 한시도 가만있질 못하는 거예요.
“태양이 이리 화창한데 왜 떨고 계신 거죠?”라며 왕자가 말했어요.
“슬프도다.”라며 그 사내가 말했어요. “난 체질이 일반인과 완전히 반대라오. 더우면 더울수록 난 춥게 느끼고 서리(추위)가 내 뼈마디를 파고들지. 하지만 추우면 추울수록 난 덥게 느끼고 얼음 한 가운데 있지 않음 내 몸의 열기를 견디지 못한다오. 난 더위와 추위가 반대라오.”
“그 참 기똥차네요,”라며 왕자가 말했어요. “제 밑에 들어오시겠다면 저랑 함께 갑시다.”
그들이 앞으로 쭉 여행을 계속하고 있는데, 어떤 사내 한 명이 기다란 목을 쭉 내밀고선 사방을 둘러보는데 산 너머까지 보고 있지 뭐예요.
“무얼 그리 열심히 보고 계십니까?”라며 왕자가 말했어요. 
그 사내가 대답했지요.
“내 눈은 예리해서 모든 숲과 들판들까지 죄다 보인다오, 언덕과 골짜기 그리고 세상 방방 곳곳이 다 보이지.”
왕자가 말했어요.
“그럼 저랑 같이 갑시다, 당신은 내가 찾던 인재요.”
그리하여 왕자는 여섯 명의 하인들과 함께 나이 든 왕비가 살고 있는 도시로 흘러들게 되었답니다.
왕자는 자신의 신분은 일단 밝히지 않고 말했어요.
“아리따운 따님만 얻을 수 있다면, 내 기꺼이 당신이 제시하는 과제를 하리다.”
아주 잘생긴 청년이 자진해서 그물로 걸어 들어온 게 여자 마법사는 뛸 듯이 기뻐 말했어요.
“세 가지 과제를 낼 것이다. 그걸 다 해내면, 넌 내 딸아이의 남편이자 주인이 될 수 있다.”
“그래 첫 번째 과제가 무엇입니까?”
“우선 내가 홍해(아프리카와 아라비아반도 사이의 바다. 바다 속 붉은 산호 때문에 물이 빨간색이라고 하네요.)에 빠뜨리고 온 반지를 가져오너라.”
그리하여 숙소로 돌아온 왕자가 자신의 하인들에게 말을 했지요.
“첫 번째 임무부터 쉽지가 않네요. 홍해에 가서 반지를 건져 오래요. 우선 거기로 가서 찾아봅시다.”
그런 다음 예리한 시력을 가진 사내가 자신해 나서며 말했어요.
“내가 한 번 들여다보리다.”
그러면서 그가 바닷물 속으로 허리를 숙이더니 말했어요.
“저기 뾰족한 바위 위에 걸려 있소.”
키다리가 그들을 거기로 데려가며 말했어요.
“보이기만 하면 내가 금방 건져 올릴 거 같은데.”
“뭐, 그거야 금방이지!”라며 뚱보가 소리치더니 쭈그리고 앉아 바닷물에 입을 가져갔어요. 그러자 마치 소용돌이가 일 듯 바닷물이 그의 입속으로 빨려 들어가기 시작했어요. 뚱보가 그런 식으로 온 바닷물을 다 마셔버리자, 홍해가 늪지처럼 싹 말라버렸어요.
키다리가 살짝 숙이더니 손으로 그 반지를 건져 올렸어요.
반지를 건네받은 왕자는 기뻐하며 나이 든 왕비에게 가 받쳤어요.
왕비는 깜짝 놀라하며 말했어요.
“이건 내 반지가 맞다. 첫 번째 과제를 잘 수행했구나, 하지만 두 번짼 쉽지 않을 게다. 궁전 앞에 풀밭이 있지? 거기에 3백 마리의 소들이 풀을 뜯어먹고 있을 게다, 이 소들을 다 먹거라, 가죽이며, 털이며, 뼈며, 뿔까지 죄다 먹어야한다. 그걸 다 먹은 후 궁전 지하실로 가 거기 있는 3백 개의 통에 든 포도주들까지 싹 다 마셔버려야 한다. 만약 소의 털 하나, 포도주의 한 방울이라도 남겼다간 네 목이 달아날 줄 알거라.”
“이 식사에 누굴 초대해도 되나요?”라며 왕자가 말했어요. “누구와 같이 먹고 싶어서요.”
노파는 악의적으로 비웃으며 대꾸했어요.
“딱 한 명만 초대를 허락하마, 그 이상은 안 된다.”
왕자는 자신의 하인들에게 가 뚱보보고 말했어요.
“오늘 내 손님으로 와서 가득 먹어줘야겠어.”
이 결과로써 똥보가 몸을 쭉쭉 뻗은 다음 몸집을 잔뜩 부풀리더니 3백 마리의 소들을 털 하나 남기지 않고 모두 먹어치워버리곤 “아침 식사가 간에 기별도 가지 않네.”라고 말하며 먹을 게 더 없냐고 물었어요.
포도주 통들 앞에 선 뚱보는 잔도 필요 없다는 듯 포도주 통 채로 벌컥벌컥 마시기 시작하더니 죄다 마시곤 마지막으로 손톱들에 떨어진 포도주 방울들까지 죄다 핥아먹었어요.
식사 과제를 완료한 왕자가 노파에게 가 “두 번째 과제도 완수했습니다.”라고 말을 했지요.
이에 깊이 경탄하며 왕비가 말했어요.
‘지금껏 여기까지 온 사람은 아무도 없었는데.’라며 그녀가 속으로 생각했어요. ‘하지만 넌 나를 피할 수 없을 게다, 오늘밤이야말로, 네 목이 달아날 줄 알거라!’
그녀가 다음과 같이 말했어요.
“내 딸애를 네 침실에 데려다주마, 그럼 넌 그 애를 안고 있어라. 안고 있으되 절대 잠에 꼻아떨어져선 안 된다. 밤 12시 시계가 울렸을 때, 내가 가보고, 네 품에 그 애가 없으면 넌 죽은 목숨인 줄 알거라.”
왕자가 생각했어요.
‘뭐야, 쉽잖아, 두 눈 부릅뜨고 있어야지.’
그래도 혹 몰라, 왕자는 자신의 하인들을 모두 모이게 한 후 왕비가 한 얘기를 들려주고 말했지요.
“숨은 꿍꿍이가 있을지 몰라요? 조심해서 안 좋을 건 없으니, 오늘 밤 공주가 제 방을 빠져나가지 못하게 해야 해요.”
밤이 깔리자, 늙은 여인이 자신의 딸을 데리고 와 왕자의 품에 건네주었어요.
그러자 키다리도 두 사람을 둥그렇게 감싸 안았고, 뚱보는 문에 자리잡고는 개미 새끼 한 마리도 들어오지 못하게 지켰답니다.
그렇게 두 사람이 앉아 있는데, 아가씨는 말 한 마디 하지 않았죠.
하지만 창문을 통해 들어온 달빛이 그녀의 얼굴에 닿아 환해지자, 왕자는 이 경이롭도록 아름다운 아가씨에게 그만 넋을 잃고 말았답니다.
왕자는 그녀를 뚫어져라 쳐다보며 사랑과 행복감에 겨워 시간 가는 줄 몰랐죠.
이런 상황이 밤 11시까지 계속되다, 늙은 여인이 주문을 걸어 그들 모두를 잠에 곯아떨어지게 하고 동시에 아가씨도 데려가 버렸죠.
그들은 밤 11시 45분까지 푹 자다, 마법의 효력이 약해져 모두 깨게 되었답니다.
“오, 이런 불운이 있나!”라며 왕자가 소리쳤어요. “난 이제 죽은 목숨이야!”
충실한 하인들 또한 탄식하기 시작했죠, 그때 ‘귀가 밝은 사내’가 말했어요.
“있어봐, 내가 한 번 들어볼게.”
그런 다음 그가 즉시 엿듣기 시작하더니 말했어요.
“공주는 여기서 1천 4백 킬로미터(지구 둘레 길이가 적도 기준으로 4만 킬로미터라고 함. 네이버검색참조) 떨어진 바위 위에 있네. 자신의 운명을 슬퍼하며 홀로 있네. 어이, 키다리라면 그녀를 데려올 수 있을 거야. 넌 서서 두 세 발만 가면 거기 닿을 거니까.”
“맞아,”라며 키다리가 대답했어요. “하지만 ‘예리한 눈을 가진 이’와 함께 가야 그 바위를 깨부술 수 있을 거야.”
그리하여 키다리는 ‘눈에 안대를 한 사내’를 등에 업고 마법에 걸린 그 바위로 갔어요.
키다리는 즉시 ‘눈에 안대를 한 사내’의 눈에게서 안대를 벗기자, 사내는 쓰윽 쳐다보았고 그 즉시 돌은 수천 가지 조각으로 산산조각 나고 말았어요.
그래서 키다리는 두 팔로 아가씨를 안아 순식간에 데리고 왔지요, 그런 다음 똑같은 속도로 동료도 데리고 왔답니다. 
그들은 밤 12시 시계가 울리기 전에 모두 다시 모여 앉았지요, 흥겹고 행복했어요.
밤 12시 시계가 울리자, 나이든 여자 마법사가 악의 가득한 표정으로 방 안을 들여다보며 소근거렸어요.
“이제 저 자는 내 것이다!”
왜냐면 자신의 딸이 1천 4백 킬로미터 떨어져 있는 바위 위에 있을 거라 한결 같이 믿었던 거지요.
하지만 방문을 열고 왕자의 품에서 공주를 본 왕비는 화들짝 놀라 말했지요. 
“나보다 한 수 위인 자가 여기 있었나 보군!”
그녀는 섣불리 반대하지 못하고 자신의 딸을 내줄 수밖엔 없었답니다.
하지만 왕비는 공주의 귀에 이렇게 속삭이는 걸 잊지 않았답니다.
“네가 좋아서 선택한 남편감도 아닌 저 천한 자에게 가다니 이 무슨 창피냐.”
이 말에 콧대 쌘 아가씨의 마음이 분노로 가득차 아가씨가 복수하려는 마음을 먹기에 이르렀어요.
다음날 아침 공주는 땔나무 장작 큰 걸로 3백 개를 가져오게 한 다음 왕자에게 이렇게 말했어요.
“당신이 비록 세 가지 임무를 완수했을지라도, 누군가 이 땔감 한 가운데 앉아 불을 견뎌낼 때까진 아직 저는 당신 아내가 아니에요.”
그의 하인들 중 누구도 나서서 불에 타 죽진 않을 거라 그녀는 생각한 거지요. 만에 하나 잘못되어 사랑에 눈이 먼 왕자가 직접 나서다 타 죽는다면 그거야 뭐 그녀는 자유가 되는 거죠.
하지만 하인들이 말했어요.
“우리들 모두가 한 가지씩 역할들을 했어, 이젠 ‘몹시 추운 자’만 남았으니 그에게 맡겨보자.”
사람들이 ‘몹시 추운 자’를 땔나무 한 가운데에 올려놓고 불을 피웠어요.
불은 땔나무가 다 탈 3일 동안 불기운을 날름거리며 활활 타 올랐어요. 불이 다 꺼졌을 때 ‘몹시 추운 자’는 사시나무 떨듯 와들와들 떨면서 잿더미 사이에 서 있다 말했어요.
“젠장, 내 평생 이리 추워보긴 또 처음이네. 조그만 더 지속되었다면 난 아마 동상에 걸리고 말았을 거야!”
이리되니 더 이상 핑계거리를 찾을 수가 없게 되었죠. 아름다운 아가씨는 이제 어쩔 수 없이 정체불명의 젊은이를 남편으로 삼을 수밖에요.
그들이 마차를 타고 교회로 향하자 늙은 여인(왕비)는 말했어요.
“도저히 이 창피를 난 못 참겠다.”
그래서 왕비는 자신의 병사들을 내보내 그들을 뒤쫓아 가 말을 듣지 않을 경우 모두 베고 자신의 딸을 데려오라 명령했어요.
하지만 밝은 귀를 가진 사내가 왕비의 이 비밀 명령을 다 엿듣고 말았죠.
“우리 이제 어쩌지?”라며 ‘귀가 밝은 사내’가 뚱보에게 말했어요.
하지만 뚱보는 이미 어찌해야하는지를 잘 알고 있었죠. 그는 마차 뒤로 가더니 한 번 두 번 예전에 마셨던 홍해 바닷물을 뿜어냈어요. 그 즉시 거대한 바닷물이 차더니 병사들이 갇혀 물에 빠져 죽고 말았답니다.
이걸 본 여자 마법사(왕비)가 자신의 기사단을 내보냈답니다.
기사단이 입은 쇠미늘갑옷이 덜커덕거리는 소리를 들은 ‘귀가 밝은 사내’가 이번엔 ‘안대를 한 자’의 눈에 있던 안대를 걷어버렸답니다. 눈이 예리한 사내의 시선이 기사단에 잠시 고정되자 그들이 유리처럼 산산조각 나 깨지고 말았지요.
그런 다음에야 청년과 아가씨는 누구의 방해도 없이 교회로 가 축복을 받을 수 있었답니다.
그 후 여섯 명의 하인들은 주인에게로 와 작별인사를 하며 말했어요.
“이제 당신의 소원들도 모두 이루어졌으니 저흰 그만 떠나볼까 합니다. 저희들도 세상에 나가 저마다의 운들을 시험해볼까 하거든요.”
왕자의 아빠 궁전이 있는 2킬로미터 앞에 다다랐을 때, 돼지 키우는 사람 하나가 자신의 돼지 떼를 몰고 가고 있었어요. 그 옆을 지나가다 말고 왕자가 자신의 아내에게 말했어요.
“내가 실은 누군지 아시오? 난 왕자가 아니라 실은 돼지를 키우는 사람이오, 저기 돼지 떼와 같이 있는 사람처럼 말이오. 저 분이 제 아빠랍니다. 이제부터 우리도 여기서 일해야 하오, 아빠를 도와야지요.”
그런 다음 왕자는 그녀를 데리고 여관으로 가 말에서 내린 다음, 여관 주인에게 몰래 “밤에 그녀가 가진 공주 옷들을 모두 치워주시오.”라고 말했지요.
그래서 공주가 아침에 깨어나 보니 입을 옷이 하나도 없지 뭐예요, 그러자 여관 주인의 아내가 오더니 공주에게 낡은 가운(옷)과 헤어진 스타킹을 한 벌 주며 무슨 큰 선심 쓰는 듯 말했어요.
“당신 남편 얼굴을 봐서 주는 거예요, 아님 어림 판 푼어치도 없지!”
그리되니 공주는 정말로 자신의 남편이 ‘돼지를 키우는 사람’이라 믿게 되었고 남편과 함께 돼지를 돌보게 되었지요.
그녀가 속으로 생각했어요.
‘그래 이건 다 내 교만함과 오만에 대한 벌인 거야.’
그런 생활이 1주일 지속되었을 때, 공주는 발이 너무 아파 더는 그 생활을 견딜 수가 없었답니다.
이때 두 서너 사람이 오더니 “당신 남편이 진짜 누군지 아세요?”라고 물어왔어요.
“네,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “그이는 ‘돼지를 키우는 사람’이에요. 지금은 돼지 몇 마리를 끌고 가 사고파느라 외출중이에요.”
그러자 그들이 말했어요.
“저희를 따라와 보시오, 그 분께 안내해드리리다.”
그들은 그녀를 데리고 궁전으로 들어갔지요.
그녀가 홀(큰 공간)에 들어서니, 위풍당당한 왕자 옷을 입은 남편이 떡하니 버티고 서있지 뭐예요.
하지만 왕자가 두 팔을 벌려 안아 주기 전까진 그녀는 남편을 알아보지 못했답니다.
왕자가 그녀에게 키스를 하며 말했어요.
“내가 당신 덕에 고생을 좀 했지 않소, 그러고 이젠 당신이 날 위해 고생을 좀 한 것이오.” 
그런 다음 그들의 결혼식이 거나하게 거행되었답니다.
아세요, 제가 이 얘기를 들려준 이가 글쎄 이 결혼식에 참석을 했었다네요.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「여섯 명의 하인」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「여섯 명의 하인」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter134.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



135. 하얀 신부와 까만 신부



한 여인이 자신의 친딸과 의붓딸을 데리고 주인 없는 땅에서 막 ‘꼴’(소나 말에게 먹이는 풀)을 베려는데, 하느님께서 가난한 자의 차림새로 걸어오시며 물으셨지요.
“마을로 가는 길이 어딘고?”
“그렇게 알고 싶으면,”라며 엄마가 말했어요. “당신이 찾아보던가.”
그리고 친딸이 덧붙였지요.
“찾기 싫음, 가이드(안내원)를 데려오던가.”
하지만 의붓딸만은 이리 대답해주었답니다.
“불쌍하신 분, 제가 길을 안내해드릴 테니, 따라오세요.”
하느님은 엄마와 친딸에게 노여움이 단단히 나셔서 돌아서서 가실 때, 저들이 밤처럼 까맣고 죄처럼 추해지라 바라셨지요.
하지만 하느님은 가련한 의붓딸에게는 자비를 느끼고 함께 가셨지요.
그렇게 그들이 마을 근처까지 왔을 때, 하느님이 그녀에게 축복을 내려주시며 말씀하셨어요.
“그래 네 소원 세 가지만 말해보거라, 내 들어주겠노라.”
그러자 아가씨가 말했어요.
“해님처럼 아름답고 살갗이 희어지고 싶어요.”
그 즉시 그녀가 대낮처럼 하예지고 예뻐졌지요.
“그리고 절대 비워지지 않는 돈주머니를 가지고 싶어요.”
하느님은 그것 또한 들어주시며 덧붙이셨어요.
“가장 중요한 것을 잊지 말거라.”
그녀가 말했어요.
“세 번째 소원은요, 저 세상에 갔을 때, 하늘나라 영원의 왕국에서 지내고 싶어요.”
그것 또한 보장해주신 다음 하느님은 그녀를 떠났답니다.
친딸과 집에 돌아온 의붓엄마는 자신들이 둘 다 석탄처럼 까맣고 추해진데 반해, 의붓딸은 하얗고 아름다워진 것을 보곤 사악한 마음이 불같이 샘솟는 걸 느끼곤, 어찌하면 그녀를 더 해코지할 수 있을까만 생각하기에 이르렀어요.
하지만 의붓딸에겐 ‘레기너’(북유럽신화 속에 나오는 대장장이 이름)라고 불리는 친오빠가 하나 있었는데, 그녀는 그를 엄청 사랑해 오늘 있었던 일을 모두 말해주었답니다.
한번은 레기너가 그녀에게 말했어요.
“사랑하는 동생아, 네 초상화 한 점을 가지고 싶어, 그럼 내 두 눈으로 계속 널 볼 수 있잖니, 왜냐면 너를 향한 내 사랑이 너무도 커서 한시도 널 안 보곤 못 살겠거든.”
그래서 그녀가 대답했어요.
“그럼, 맹세해줘, 아무에게도 그 그림을 보여주지 않겠다고.”
그리하여 그는 여동생의 그림을 그려 자기 방에 걸어놓았어요.
하지만 그는 궁전에서 살고 있었답니다. 왜냐면 마부였거든요.
매일 같이 그는 그 그림 앞에 서서 이토록 사랑스런 여동생을 주신 하느님께 감사기도를 드렸답니다.
그러다 우연히 그가 봉사하는 왕이 아내를 잃고 말았어요. 왕비님은 무척이나 아름다워 미모에 관해서라면 이 세상 그 누구와도 겨룰 수가 없었을 정도였지요. 그래서 왕은 큰 상심에 빠지고 말았답니다.
하지만 궁전에 사는 수행원들이 곧 마부가 아름다운 그림 앞에 매일 같이 서 있는 걸 발견하게 되었어요.
그들은 질투심을 느끼곤 왕께 보고해버렸지요.
그래서 왕이 “그 그림을 가져와 보거라.”라고 명령을 내렸어요.
실제 그 그림 속 여인은 모든 면에서 죽은 왕비와 일치했어요. 게다가 왕비보다 훨씬 더 아름답기까지 하였지요, 그래서 왕은 불같은 사랑을 느끼고 말았답니다.
왕이 마부를 불러 “이 여인이 누구냐?”고 물었어요. 
마부가 “그건 제 여동생입니다.”라고 말했어요.
그래서 왕은 “그녀가 아니면 누구와도 결혼하지 않겠다. 네게 마차와 말들과 화려한 금실 옷들을 줄 테니 어서 가서 선택받은 신부를 데리고 오너라.”라고 말했어요.
그래서 레기너가 심부름을 나갔지요, 여동생이 너무도 기뻐했어요. 하지만 까만 아가씨는 의붓자매의 행운에 미칠 것 같은 질투심을 느껴 머리가 돌 지경이어서 자신의 엄마에게 말했어요.
“이게 뭐야, 엄마 재능들로 내게 저런 행운 하나 쥐어주지 못하는데 이게 다 무슨 소용이냐고?”
“있어봐라,”라며 노파가 말했어요. “내 곧 마법의 술수들을 쓰서라도 저 행운을 네게로 돌려주마.”
그래서 그녀는 마부의 눈을 반쯤 눈멀게 하고, 하얀 아가씨를 반쯤 귀가 멀게 해버렸답니다.
그럼 다음 그들이 마차에 올랐는데, 우선 귀한 왕실 의상을 입은 신부가 탔고요, 다음으로 의붓엄마가 자기 친딸과 함께 올랐지요, 그리고 레기너가 마부 석에 앉아 마차를 출발시켰답ㄴ디ㅏ.
가는 도중 시간이 좀 지났을 무렵 마부가 소리쳤어요.
“잘 덮어, 내 사랑하는 여동생아, 그래야 비에 젖지 않고, 바람도 네게 먼지를 씌우지 못하지. 그래야 왕께 나아갔을 때 하얗고 아름다울 수 있잖니.”
신부가 물었어요.
“오빠 뭐라고?”
“아,”라며 노파가 말했어요. “네 금실 드레스를 벗어서 동생에게 주라고 말하는 구나.”
그래서 그녀가 옷을 벗어 까만 아가씨에게 입으라고 주고, 대신 의붓자매의 추리하고 우중충한 가운을 받아 입었어요.
그렇게 좀 더 마차를 타고 가는데 좀 지났을까, 친오빠가 다시 소리쳤어요.
“잘 덮어, 내 사랑하는 여동생아, 그래야 비에 젖지 않고, 바람도 네게 먼지를 씌우지 못하지. 그래야 왕께 나아갔을 때 하얗고 아름다울 수 있잖니.”
신부가 물었어요.
“뭐라고요, 오빠?”
“아,”라며 노파가 말했어요. “네 금실 두건(모자)을 벗어 동생에게 주라고 하는구나.”
그래서 그녀가 두건을 벗어 동생에게 주고, 대신 자신은 머리를 내놓고 갔어요.
그렇게 그들이 좀 더 마차를 타고 달려가는데, 좀 지났을까, 친오빠가 다시 한 번 더 소리쳤어요.
“잘 덮어, 내 사랑하는 여동생아, 그래야 비에 젖지 않고, 바람도 네게 먼지를 씌우지 못하지. 그래야 왕께 나아갔을 때 하얗고 아름다울 수 있잖니.”
신부가 물었어요.
“뭐라고요, 오빠?”
“아,”라며 노파가 말했어요. “마차 밖을 좀 내다보라는 구나.”
하지만 그건 그들이 깊은 강물 위에 가로 놓인 다리 위를 지날 때였어요.
신부가 일어나 마차 밖을 내다보려고 몸을 숙이자, 의붓엄마와 의붓자매가 힘껏 그녀를 밖으로 차버려 그는 그만 풍덩하고 강물 한 가운데로 떨어지고 말았어요.
그녀가 가라앉음과 동시에 눈처럼 새하얀 오리 한 마리가 거울처럼 보드라운 그 강물 위로 솟구쳐 올라오더니 강 아래로 헤엄쳐갔어요.
친오빠는 아무것도 알지 못한 채로 마차를 몰고 궁전에 도착했답니다.
그런 다음 그는 까만 아가씨를 자신의 여동생인줄 알고 왕께 데려다주었지요. 그는 정말 그녀가 자기 여동생인줄 알았거든요, 마녀가 눈을 흐릿하게 만들었으니까요, 게다가 그녀가 반짝이는 금실 의상을 입고 있어 더 착각을 하게 만들었지요.
왕이 이 근거 없이 못생긴 까만 신부를 보곤 화딱지가 나 “당장 마부를 독사들과 뱀들이 가득한 구덩이에 처넣어라.”라고 명령했어요.
하지만 노파가 마술을 사용해 왕에게 아첨하고 눈에 콩깍지를 씌우자 왕은 그녀와 딸을 궁전에 머물게 하고 뭐 그럭저럭 마음도 있고 하여 정말로 까만 신부와 결혼하기에 이르렀답니다.
어느 날 저녁 까만 신부가 왕의 무릎위에 앉아 있을 때, 새하얀 오리가 하수도를 통해 부엌까지 헤엄쳐와 부엌심부름 소년에게 말을 걸었어요.
“얘야, 불을 지피렴, 내 깃털 좀 말리게.”
그래서 소년이 그 말 대로 했지요, 난로에 불을 지폈답니다.
그러자 오리가 다가오더니 난로 옆에 앉아 몸을 털더니 자신의 부리(입)이로 깃털들을 가지런히 했어요.
그녀는 그러고 앉아 기분이 좋아졌는지 물었어요.
“내 친오빠 레기너는 뭘 하고 있니?”
부엌방(설거지 등을 하는 공간)… 소년이 대답했지요.
“그는 지금 독사들과 뱀들이 우글거리는 구덩이 속에 갇혀 있어요.”
그런 다음 그녀가 물었어요.
“그럼 까만 신부는 집에서 무얼 하고 있니?”
소년이 대답했어요.
“그녀는 왕에게서 사랑을 받으며 행복해하고 있지요.”
“그 이에게 자비가 있기를.”라는 말을 남긴 채 오리가 다시 하수구를 통해 헤엄쳐 나갔어요.
다음날 밤에도 그녀가 다시 찾아오더니 같은 질문들을 했어요, 셋째 밤에도 마찬가지였고요.
그러자 더는 감출 수 없었던 그 부엌방 소년이 왕한테 가 모두 말씀드리기에 이르렀답니다.
하지만 왕은 직접 자기 눈으로 확인하고 싶어져, 다음날 저녁 거리로 가 기다리고 있었답니다.
오리가 하수구를 통해 머리를 내밀자, 왕이 자신의 검을 뽑아 싹둑 베어버렸지요.
그 즉시 오리가 이루 말할 수 없을 정도로 아리따운 아가씨로 변했답니다, 정말 초상화 속 바로 그 여인이었지요. 그녀의 친오빠가 그녀를 그린 모습 그대로 말이죠.
왕은 뛸 듯이 기뻤어요. 
그리고 그녀가 흠뻑 젖은 채 거기 서 있었기에, 그가 훌륭한 의상을 가져오게 해 그녀에게 입혀주었지요.
그런 다음 그녀는 거짓과 기만으로 당한 애기를 들려주고 급기야는 강물로 던져지게 된 얘기까지 드렸답니다. 그녀는 우선 자신의 친오빠를 뱀들의 소굴에서 빼내줄 것을 간청 드렸어요. 
그래서 왕은 그 바램을 이루어주고는, 한 걸음에 늙은 마녀가 머물고 있는 방으로 가 지금까지 있었던 일들을 언급하며 이렇게 물었답니다.
“이러 저러한 일을 한 여자가 있는데 어찌 처벌하면 되겠는가?”
하지만 아무것도 모르는 그녀는 눈치 없이 이렇게 말했지요.
“발가벗겨 못이 숭숭 박힌 통 속에 집어넣곤 말에게 끌게 해 전국 방방곳곳으로 끌고 다녀야합니다.”
그 모든 일이 그녀와 그녀의 까만 친딸에게 내려졌지요.
하지만 왕은 아름다운 하얀 신부와 결혼식을 올렸답니다. 물론 그녀의 충실한 친오빠에게 보상을 내려준 건 두말할 것도 없고요.
그리하여 그녀의 친오빠는 부자도 되고 왕국의 저명인사도 되었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「하얀 신부와 까만 신부」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「하얀 신부와 까만 신부」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter135.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



136. 무쇠 한스



궁전 인근에 큰 숲을 하나 가지고 있던 왕이 옛날에 살고 있었어요. 그 숲엔 각종 야생짐승들로 가득했지요.
하루는 왕이 사냥꾼 한 명을 그 숲으로 보내 노루를 사냥해오라 시켰는데 그 자가 돌아오질 않는 거예요.
“뭔가 사고가 난 모양이군.”라며 왕이 말하곤, 다음날 사냥꾼 두 명을 추가로 보내 그 자를 찾아보라 시켰는데 그들도 또한 돌아오지 않지 뭐예요.
그러자 셋째 날엔 왕이 자신의 모든 사냥꾼들을 그 숲으로 보내며 말했어요.
“온 숲을 샅샅이 뒤져서라도 그 셋을 찾거라.”
하지만 그들뿐만 아니라 함께 간 수많은 사냥개들 또한 흔적도 없이 사라지고 말았죠.
그 이후 아무도 더는 이 숲에 들어가려 하지 않았고, 숲은 고요히 정적이 흐르는 가운데 누구도 눈에 띄지 않았고 이따금씩 숲 위를 나는 독수리와 매만 보였지요.
이렇게 많은 세월이 흘렀을 때, 한 낯선 사냥꾼이 왕 앞에 자진해 나서며 자신이 그들을 찾아보러 그 위험한 숱에 들어가 보겠노라 말했죠.
하지만 왕은 선뜻 승낙해주지 않았어요.
“거긴 안전하지 않다네. 자네도 다른 이들처럼 돌아오지 못할까 그게 염려스러워.”
사냥꾼은 대답했어요. 
“왕이시어, 제가 자진해 나서는 위험이니 감내하겠나이다.”
그리하여 사냥꾼은 자신의 개를 데리고 숲으로 들어갔답니다.
머지않아 사냥감을 발견한 개가 그걸 쫓아갔지요. 개가 두 세 발자국만 가면 따라잡을 순간 사냥감은 온데간데없고 깊은 물웅덩이 하나가 떡하니 서있지 뭐예요. 개는 오도 가도 못했죠.
그때 벌거벗은 팔 하나가 쑥 하고 물 밖으로 나오더니 개를 움켜쥐곤 끌고 들어가 버렸어요.
이 광경을 본 사냥꾼이 돌아와 양동이를 든 세 사람을 데려와 물을 퍼기 시작했죠.
바닥이 드러나자, 누렇게 녹이 쓴 거 같이 갈색인 야만인 한 명의 몸이 드러났는데, 그의 머리카락은 얼굴을 온통 덮다 못해 무릎까지 내려와 있었어요.
사람들이 그를 새끼줄에 묶어 성으로 데려왔어요.
야만인을 보고 성 사람들도 기겁을 했어요.
하지만 왕은 그를 마당에 있던 철제 우리에 가두고 “문을 열어주는 자가 있음 사형에 처하리라.”라고 말하며 열쇠를 왕비에게 맡기며 철저히 보관하게 했지요.
그제야 숲도 안전하게 변하여 누구나 갈 수 있는 곳이 되었답니다.
왕에게는 8살짜리 아들이 한 명 있었어요. 그 아이가 마당에서 놀다 그만 가지고 놀던 황금 공이 우리로 굴러들어가고 말았어요.
소년이 달려가 말했어요.
“제 공 주세요.”
“이 문을 열어줄 때까진 안 돼.”라며 사내가 말했어요.
“안돼요,”라며 소년이 말했어요. “그건 안 돼요, 왕께서도 금하셨단 말예요.” 그리곤 소년은 도망가버렸죠.
다음날 소년은 다시 찾아와 자신의 공을 돌려달라 말했어요.
야만인이 말했어요.
“문부터 열거라.”
하지만 소년은 그러지 않았죠.
셋째 날 왕이 말을 타고 사냥을 가시자, 소년은 한 번 더 찾아와 말했어요.
“열어드리고 싶어도 열쇠가 어딨는지 몰라 열어드릴 수 없어요.”
그러자 야만인이 말했어요.
“네 엄마의 베개 밑에 열쇠가 있을 게다, 가져오거라.”
공을 되찾고 싶었던 소년은 별 생각 없이 열쇠를 가져와, 힘들게 문을 열어주었어요. 문을 여는 과정에 손가락이 끼어 고생은 했지만요.
문이 열리자 야만인이 황금 공을 소년에게 건네곤 뛰쳐나오더니 그 길로 달아나려했어요. 
그 바람에 소년이 화들짝 놀라 그를 소리쳐 부르며 외쳤어요.
“오, 야만인 아저씨, 달아나지 마세요, 안 그럼 제가 매 맞는단 말예요!”
야만인이 돌아오더니 소년을 들어 어깨 위에 얹더니 거친 발걸음을 계속해 그 숲으로 달아나버렸어요.
궁전에 돌아온 왕이 텅 빈 우리를 보곤 “왕비, 대체 이게 무슨 일이오?”라고 물었어요.
그녀로서도 알 길이 없어 열쇠를 찾아보았더니 열쇠가 어딜 가고 없는 거예요.
그녀가 소년을 불러보았더니 또한 아무런 대답이 없었고 말이죠.
왕이 사람들을 풀어 들판을 뒤져 왕자를 찾아보게 했지만 헛수고였어요.
그제야 왕도 무슨 일이 벌어진 건지를 추측하게 되었고, 궁전엔 침통함이 가득했답니다.
깊은 숲에 다시 한 번 오게 된 야만인이 어깨에서 소년을 바닥에 내려놓으며 말했어요.
“이제 아빠 엄마는 다시 못 볼 줄 알거라, 넌 이제부터 나와 함께 머물거다, 이건 다 너를 불쌍히 여겨서다, 게다가 나를 구해준 것도 있고. 하지만 내가 금지하는 행동을 하면 너 또한 이별이다. 난 보물이며 금은 얼마든지 가지고 있다, 세상 그 누구보다 난 부자지.”
그는 소년이 누워 잘 침대를 이끼로 만들어주었어요.
다음날 아침 사내가 소년을 데리고 샘으로 가 말했어요.
“잘 봐둬라, 이 황금 샘은 수정만큼 맑고 청아하다, 넌 여기 옆에 앉아 이 샘을 지키면 된다. 무엇 하나도 이 샘에 떨어뜨리지 않게 조심하거라, 그렇지 않음 샘이 오염되고 말 테니. 매일 저녁마다 내가 와 네가 내 말을 잘 지켰는지 볼 것이다.”
소년은 샘 가장자리에 앉아 종종 샘 안에 있는 황금 물고기 한 마리와 황금 뱀 한 마리를 보곤 했지만 조심한 결과 아무 것도 떨어뜨리지 않았답니다.
그렇게 앉아 있는데 손가락이 너무도 욱씬거리는 바람에 소년이 손가락을 샘물에 담그고 말았어요.
재빨리 다시 손가락을 뺐지만 그새 손가락이 황금빛으로 물들고 말았죠, 그가 아무리 씻어보려 했지만 허사였어요.
저녁에 무쇠 한스(←독일어. 한스는 ‘독일사람’이란 뜻임. 영어로는 ‘존’임)가 돌아와 소년을 보더니 말했어요.
“샘이 어찌된 거냐?”
“아뇨, 아무 것도요.”라며 그가 대답했어요, 물론 자신의 손가락을 등 뒤로 숨겨 사내에게 안 보이려고 했지만요.
하지만 사내가 말했어요.
“물에 손가락을 담궜구나, 이만만 그냥 넘어가마, 하지만 다신 그런 일이 없도록 조심하거라.”
날이 밝자 소년은 또 샘가에 앉아 망을 보았지요.
그런데 손가락에서 또 아픔이 느껴지지 뭐예요, 그래서 소년이 머리를 뒤로 넘겼지요, 그 순간 불행하게도 머리카락 한 올이 샘에 떨어지고 말았어요.
깜짝 놀란 소년이 급히 머리카락을 주웠지만 이미 머리카락 한 올은 황금빛으로 물든 이후였답니다.
무쇠 한스가 왔을 때 그는 벌써 무슨 일이 있었는지를 알고 있었어요.
“샘에 머리카락 하나가 떨어졌구나,”라며 그가 말했어요. “이번 한 번만 용서하마, 하지만 세 번째로 또 이런 일이 일어나면 그땐 이 샘물도 오염되고 말 게다, 그럼 넌 절대 나랑 여기 머물 수 없게 된다.”  
셋째 날, 샘 옆에 앉은 소년은 손가락이 욱씬거렸지만 이번만은 절대 손가락을 움직이지 않았죠.
하지만 오래 앉아 있다 보니 샘물의 수면에 자신의 얼굴이 반사되는 걸 보고 있게 되었죠.
그가 자연스레 몸을 숙여 자세히 들여다보려다 그만 그의 어깨 위까지 내려와 있던 긴 머리카락들이 물 속에 빠지고 말았답니다.
그가 급히 몸을 일으켰지만 이미 온 머리카락들이 황금빛으로 물들여져 태양처럼 환히 빛을 내뿜고 있지 뭐예요.
이 가련한 소년이 얼마나 겁을 집어먹었을지 여러분은 상상이 가세요!
그가 자신의 손수건을 꺼내 머리를 감쌌어요, 사내에게 안 들키려는 의도였지요.
거기 도착한 무쇠 한스는 이미 다 알고서 말했어요.
“손수건을 벗거라.,”
그러자 황금머릿결이 앞으로 흘러내렸고, 소년은 용서를 구할 수 밖에 없었죠. 하지만 허사였답니다.
“넌 이제 여기 계속 있을 수 없다. 세상으로 나가거라, 나가면 가난이 뭔지 배우게 될 게다. 하지만 네 마음씨가 나쁘지 않아 내 너에게 호의를 하나 베푸마. 어떤 곤란에 처하게 되면 이 숲으로 와 ‘무쇠 한스’라고 큰 소리로 부르거라. 그럼 내가 나타나 도와줄 것이다. 내 힘은 거대하다, 네가 생각하는 것 이상이지. 난 금화와 은화를 무진장 가지고 있단다.”
그런 다음 왕자는 숲을 나와 터벅터벅 밟아 다져진 길이든 밟아 다져지지 않은 길이든 걸어갔답니다. 그러다 마침내 큰 도시에 도착하게 되었지요.
거기서 왕자는 일자리를 구해보았지만 쉽게 구할 수 없었어요. 오랜 궁전생활 탓에 스스로 할 수 있는 일이 거의 없었기 때문이지요.
결국 궁전에 가서야 간신히 일자리를 얻을 수 있었어요.
궁전 하인들 눈에 왕자가 별로 일을 잘 못하게 보였지만 사람이 착한 게 마음에 들어 머물러도 좋다는 말을 했던 거지요.
요리사가 자기 휘하에 왕자를 두고 땔나무와 물을 나르고 타다 남은 숯들을 끌어 모아 치우게 했거든요. 
그러다 한 번은 우연히 아무도 곁에 없어서 요리사가 그에게 음식을 왕의 식탁까지 나르게 했지요. 하지만 왕자는 남에게 황금 머릿결을 보일 수 없어 작은 모자를 쓰고 갔답니다.
그러다 보니 그 모습이 왕의 주목을 끌게 되어 왕이 말했죠.
“왕의 식탁에 올 땐 모자를 벗어야 하느니라.”
그가 대답했어요. 
“아, 왕이시어, 그럴 수 없나이다. 제 머리에 심한 흉터가 있어서요.”
그리되니 왕도 요리사를 불러 이런 버릇없는 소년에게 식사시중을 들게 했다며 호통을 치시며 당장 내보내라 말했지요.
하지만 요리사는 도리어 소년이 불쌍해져 정원에서 일하는 소년과 임무 교환을 하게 했지요.
그리하여 소년은 나무를 심고 정원에 물을 주고 구멍을 파고 다시 메우며 굳은 날이건 맑은 날이건 일을 했답니다.
여름에 정원에서 혼자 일을 하고 있는데, 너무도 더워 자신의 작은 모자를 벗고 선선한 바람을 느꼈답니다.
햇살이 머리카락들에 반사되며 사방으로 환히 비추는 바람에 공주님의 침실에까지 그 빛이 가 닿아 무슨 일이 일어난 나 보려고 공주가 일어나기에 이르렀죠.
소년을 본 그녀가 말했어요.
“애, 꽃을 한 다발 따오려무나.”
소년이 꽃을 들고 계단을 올라가다, 정원사와 마주쳤는데, 정원사가 말했어요.
“그리 흔해빠진 꽃을 공주님께 바치려고? 아서라, 다시 가서, 가장 예쁘고 희귀한 꽃으로 바꿔오너라.”
“오, 아녜요,”라며 소년이 대꾸했어요. “들꽃이 가장 향기로울 때에요, 이걸 보시면 좋아해주실 거예요.”
소년이 방에 드니, 공주가 말했어요.
“네 모자를 벗거라, 내 앞에서까지 쓰고 있을 필요는 없지 않니.”
그가 다시 말했어요.
“안 되는데요, 제 머리에 심한 흉터가 있어서요.”
하지만 공주는 그의 모자를 낚아채더니 벗겨버렸답니다. 그 순간 소년의 황금 머릿결이 어깨 위로 출렁 흘러내리며 온 사방을 환히 비추었어요.
소년이 뛰쳐나가려하자, 공주가 소년의 팔을 잡으며 금화 한 움큼을 건네주었어요.
금화를 받아 나오긴 했지만 소년에게 금화엔 관심이 없었죠.
그는 그 돈을 정원사에게 주며 말했어요.
“자녀분께 선물을 사 주세요, 장난감 같은 거요.”
다음날 공주가 다시 소년을 부러더니 들꽃으로 만든 화환을 가져다달라 말했어요.
그가 꽃을 들고 가니, 그녀가 즉시 모자를 낚아채 벗기려했어요, 하지만 소년이 두 손으로 모자를 꼭 움켜쥐고 있는 바람에 벗길 수 없었죠.
그녀가 다시 소년에게 한 움큼의 금화를 주었어요, 하지만 소년은 그 돈을 가지고 있지 않고 정원사에게 “자녀분들 장난감이나 사 주세요.”라며 줘 버렸지요.
셋째 날에도 똑같은 일이 벌어졌지요, 하지만 공주는 이번에도 모자를 벗길 수 없었고, 소년도 더는 돈을 받지 않으려 했지요.
머지않아 적이 나라에 쳐들어왔어요.
왕이 급히 사람들을 모아보았지만 과연 강력한 적들에게 효과적으로 대항할 수 있을지는 미지수였어요.
그때 정원사 보조 청년이 말했어요.
“저도 이제 다 컸으니 전쟁에 나가겠습니다. 제게 말 한 마리만 주십시오.” 
사람들이 비웃으며 말했지요.
“우리가 말들을 다 타고 가면 마구간에 널 위한 말 한 마리 쯤 남아 있을 게다.”
사람들이 전쟁터로 나가고 청년이 마구간에 가 말을 끌고나와보니 그 말은 다리 하나를 절뚝거리며 지그재그로 걷는 말이었어요. 그럼에도 그는 말에 올라타고서 울창한 그 숲으로 향했지요.
숲 변두리에 도착한 청년이 소리쳤어요.
“무쇠 한스.”
그렇게 세 번을 어찌나 힘차게 불렀던지 온 숲의 나무들이 메아리쳤어요.
그 즉시 야만인이 나타나며 말했어요.
“그래 바라는 게 무엇이더냐?”
“힘센 말 한 필이 필요해요, 그걸 몰고 제가 전쟁터로 나갈 거거든요.”
“좋다, 필요한 거보다 더 주지.”
그런 다음 야만인은 숲으로 되돌아갔고, 오래지 않아 ‘마구간에서 일하는 소년’이 콧구멍으로 힘센 바람을 내뿜는 힘찬 말 한 필을 데리고 나오는데, 그 뒤로 철갑옷을 입고 태양처럼 번쩍이는 섬광들을 내뿜는 검을 손에 쥔 기사단이 뒤따르고 있었어요.
청년은 자신이 타고 온 발을 절뚝거리는 말은 그 ‘마구간에서 일하는 소년’에게 건네주고, 자신이 힘센 말에 올라타고 기사단의 선두에 섰어요.
그가 전쟁터로 가보니, 왕의 군사들은 이미 태반이 쓰러져 있었고, 적은 수가 간신히 살아남아 퇴각에 퇴각을 거듭하고 있었어요.
청년은 철제 기사단을 이끌고 그 길로 돌진해 마치 허리케인처럼 적들을 섬멸하기 시작해 곧 전세를 역전시키고 물리쳤답니다.
적들이 달아나기 시작하자 청년은 한 번도 멈추지 않고서 남은 적 한 명까지 무찔렀지요.
그러는 사이 왕이 돌아오자, 청년은 자신의 기사단을 이끌고 샛길을 통해 숲으로 가 “무쇠 한스”를 불러냈어요. 
“그래 바라는 게 뭐더냐?”라며 야만인이 말했어요.
“당신의 말과 기사단을 거두어가주세요, 그리고 제가 처음에 데려왔었던 ‘발을 절뚝거리는 말’을 다시 돌려주셨으면 합니다.”
그의 요구가 다 들어진 후, 그는 ‘발을 절뚝거리는 말’을 탔지요.
왕이 궁전으로 돌아오자, 공주님은 아빠를 마중 나가 승리를 축하드렸어요.
“승리를 거둔 건 내가 아니니라.”라며 왕이 말했어요. “어떤 강력한 기사가 자신의 기사단을 이끌고 와 도와주었단다.”
공주님은 그 낯선 기사가 누군지 알고 싶어 더 물어보았지만, 왕도 모르는 사람이었어요.
왕이 말했어요.
“내가 다시 가보니, 그는 이미 사라지고 없더구나.”
공주가 정원사에게 “소년이 어디 있냐?”고 물었더니, 정원사는 미소를 짓더니 말했지요.
“절뚝거리는 말을 타고 방금 막 돌아왔지요, 그래서 사람들이 ‘여기 절름○이 돌아왔다!’라며 그 애를 놀리느라 정신이 없습니다요. 아 글쎄, 사람들이 ‘너 이때껏 산울타리 밑에서 자다 왔지?’라고 놀리자, 그 애가 말하길, ‘난 큰일을 하고 왔어, 내가 없었다면 최악의 상황까지 갔을 걸.’라고 하지 뭡니까요, 그 바람에 사람들이 더 그 애를 놀려대고 있습죠.”
왕이 자신의 딸에게 말했어요.
“아무래도 큰 잔치를 3일 동안 연다는 선포를 해야겠다, 그때 네가 황금 사과를 하나씩 던지려무나. 그럼 그 이름 모를 기사도 올 게 아니냐.”
큰 잔치가 발표되자, 젊은이는 숲으로 가 “무쇠 한스”를 소리쳐 불렀어요.
“그래 바라는 게 무엇이더냐?”라고 그가 말했어요.
“공주님의 황금 사과를 제가 받을 수 있었음 해서요.”
“이런 경우 확실하게 하기 위해,”라며 무쇠 한스가 말했어요. “붉은 갑옷과 기운찬 밤색 말을 한 필 줄 테니 타고가거라.”
그 날이 되자, 젊은이는 말을 타고 집합장소로 가 기사들 틈에 끼었어요, 아무도 그를 알아보지 못했지요.
공주가 앞으로 나오더니 황금 사과 하나를 기사들을 향해 던졌어요, 하지만 아무도 잡을 수 없었죠, 그 젊은이가 전속력으로 질주해 사과를 낚아챘거든요.
둘째 날에도 무쇠 한스는 젊은이를 흰 기사 차림새로 하고 흰 말을 타고 가게 장비와 말을 주었지요.
이 날도 사과를 잡은 자는 젊은이였지요. 하지만 젊은이는 그 즉시 말을 타고 전속력으로 사라져버렸지요.
그 바람에 점점 화가 난 왕이 지시를 말했어요.
“그러지 말게 해라. 내 앞에 나와 이름을 밝히게 하라.”
또한 왕은 지시를 내리길, “그 기사가 또 사과를 잡고 가버리면, 뒤쫓아 가서 데려오고, 만약 순순히 따라오지 않겠다고 하면 찌르고 쓰러뜨려서라도 데려오라”고 했어요.
셋째 날, 젊은이는 무쇠 한스로부터 검정색 갑옷과 검정색 말을 받아 나타나 또 다시 사과를 거머쥐었지요.
하지만 그가 가버리자, 왕의 수행원들이 그를 뒤쫓아 갔는데, 그들 중 한 명이 젊은이 근처까지 쫓아가 젊은이의 다리에 칼을 살짝 찔러 상처를 입히는데 성공했어요.
그럼에도 불구하고 젊은이가 추격을 피해 달아나는데 까진 성공했지만, 말이 난폭하게 껑충 뛰어오르는 바람에 젊은이가 쓰고 있던 투구(쇠로 만든 모자)가 머리에서 벗겨지는 바람에, 뒤쫓던 모두가 젊은이의 황금 머릿결을 보고 말았죠.
그들이 말을 타고 돌아와 그 사실을 왕께 보고했어요.
그 다음 날 공주가 정원사에게 소년에 대해 물었어요.
“그 애는 정원에서 일을 하고 있습죠. 그 별난 녀석도 큰 잔치에 다녀왔는데, 아 글쎄 어제 저녁엔 제 아이들(자녀들)에게 자신이 상을 탔다면 황금 사과 세 개를 보여주지 뭡니까요.”
왕이 그를 호출했어요. 
그는 모자를 쓰고 나타났지요.
하지만 공주님이 다가가 모자를 벗겨버렸어요. 그 바람에 그의 황금 머릿결이 출렁하고 어깨 위로 흘러내렸죠. 어찌나 그가 잘생겼던지 보는 이 모두가 감탄을 하고 말았어요.
“네가 큰 잔치에 각기 다른 색상의 차림새를 하고 매일 같이 와 황금 사과를 타 간 사람이더냐?”라고 왕이 물었어요. 
“네,”라며 그가 대답했어요. “여기 그 사과들이 있사옵니다.”
그가 자신의 호주머니에서 사과들을 꺼내 왕께 보여드리며 말했어요. 
“추가적인 증거를 더 원하시면, 왕의 부하들이 저를 뒤 쫓아와 제게 입힌 상처도 보여드릴 수 있사옵니다.”
“그런 네 행동들을 보니 넌 한낱 정원사의 심부름소년이 아닌 게 분명하다. 말해 보거라, 네 아빠가 누구시더냐?”
“제 아빠는 강력한 왕이십니다. 금도 제가 원하는 만큼 까짓것 주실 수 있는 분이십니다.”
“그래 알겠다,”라며 왕이 말했어요. “고마워서 그런다, 내가 무얼 해주면 좋겠느냐?”
“네,”라며 그가 대답했어요. “소원이 있습니다. 따님을 제 아내로 주시옵소서.”
처녀가 웃으며 말했어요.
“저 이는 허물없이 행동해요, 하지만 전 그의 황금 머릿결을 예전에 한 번 보고서 그가 정원사의 심부름꾼 소년일리 없다는 걸 알고 있었답니다.”
그런 다음 그녀는 그에게 다가가 키스를 해주었어요.
결혼식엔 그의 아빠와 엄마도 오셨답니다, 그들은 너무도 기뻐했지요. 왜냐면 사랑하는 아들을 다시 볼 거란 기대를 완전히 포기한 상태에서 결혼 소식을 들었거든요.
그들이 결혼축하연 자리에 저마다 앉아 있는데, 별안간 음악이 뚝 멈추며, 문들이 활짝 열리더니 위풍당당한 왕 한 분이 자신의 많은 수행원들을 데리고 입장하셨어요.
왕은 젊은이에게 다가가더니 얼싸 안으며 말했어요.
“내가 바로 무쇠 한스라네. 마법에 걸린 야만인 말일세. 하지만 자네 덕분에 지금 막 나도 마법에서 풀려날 수 있었네. 내가 소유한 막대한 금은보화는 이제 자네 것이 될 걸세.”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「무쇠 한스」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「무쇠 한스」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter136.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



137. 세 명의 검은 공주



‘인도’(아시아에 있는 인도)가 적에게 포위를 당했는데, 적들이 은화 6백 개를 내놓을 때까지 물러나지 않겠다고 말했어요.
그래서 주민들이 북을 치며 선포하길, “누구든 그 돈을 마련하는 사람을 시장으로 삼겠다.”라고 했답니다.
때마침 가난한 어부가 자신의 아들과 호수에서 물고기를 잡아 생활하다, 그 적들이 들이 닫쳐 아들을 포로로 잡아가며 대신 은화 6백 개를 아빠에게 주고 갔어요.
그래서 아빠가 가서 도시의 지도자들에게 그 돈을 건넸지요.
결국 적들은 물러가고, 어부는 시장이 되었답니다.
그리하여 “누구든 시장님이라고 불러야 한다. 그러지 않으면 교수형에 처하리라.”라는 엄명이 (도시의 지도자들에 의해) 내려진 것도 이때였지요.
아들은 적지에서 탈출해 큰 산이 하나 솟아 있는 울창한 숲에 도착했어요.
그때 산이 열리더니 마법에 걸린 웅대한 성 하나가 나타났어요.
그가 들어가 보니 거기의 의자며 탁자며 긴 의자들이 죄다 검은색이지 뭐예요.
그때 얼굴부위만 살짝 희고 온통 까만 드레스를 입은 세 젊은 공주님들이 나오시더니, “두려워 말라, 우린 너를 해치지 않을 것이다, 우릴 구해줄 사람은 너다.”라고 말했어요.
“뭔 소리신지는 모르겠지만 저도 그리되면 기쁠 겁니다요.”라고 그가 말했어요.
이 말을 들은 그녀들이 그에게 말했어요.
“넌 1년 동안 우리들에게 말을 걸어서도 안 되며 쳐다봐서도 안 된다. 다만 네게 궁금한 것이 있고 그걸 우리가 답해줄 용의가 있으면 그땐 답해주리라.” 
그리하여 그는 거기서 오랫동안 머물게 되었지요.
그러다 아빠에게 가 보고 싶어 “가도 되나요?”라고 물었는데 “가도 된다”는 허락을 받았어요.
그래서 돈이 두둑이 든 지갑과 외투를 입고 가기로 했지요, 단 1주일 후엔 다시 돌아와야 한다는 조건을 달고서 말이죠.
그가 준비를 마치자마자 즉시 인도에 가 있었어요.
그런데 어부의 오두막에서 더는 아빠를 찾을 수가 없지 뭐예요. 그래서 사람들에게 “불쌍한 어부를 어디가면 찾을 수 있습니까?”라고 물어보았지만, 그들은 “절대 그리 말하면 안 된다, 그런 소리를 했다간 교수형에 쳐해진단다.”라는 말만 반복했어요.
마침내 그가 아빠에게 가 말했어요.
“어부셨는데, 지금 이게 다 무슨 일이랍니까?”
그러자 아빠가 말했어요.
“그런 말마오. 도시의 지도자들께서 아셨다간, 당신을 교수형에 처하러 드실 게오.”
하지만 아들은 그러지 않았고 결국 교수대로 끌려갔지요.
거기 도착했을 때 아들이 말했어요.
“오, 나랏님들이시어, 죽기 전에 낡은 어부의 오두막에 잠시 다녀오게 해주십시오.”
그런 다음 그는 자신의 정든 작업복을 입고서 다시 지도자들 앞으로 돌아와 말했어요.
“보이십니까? 제가 불쌍한 어부의 아들이 아님 무엇입니까? 제가 이 옷을 입고 아빠 엄마를 위해 밥벌이를 하지 않았던가요?”
그제야 그의 아빠 또한 그를 다시 알아보곤 대신 용서를 구하고 아들을 데리고 집으로 갔어요. 
그런 다음 아들은 그동안의 일과 자신이 높은 산위에 있는 숲에 들어간 일이며 도착해보니 산이 열린 일이며 그래서 마법에 걸린 그 성안으로 들어간 일이며 거긴 모두 검었는데, 얼굴부위만 살짝 희고 온통 까만 세 젊은 공주님들이 나온 일이며, 그녀들이 “겁먹지 말라. 네가 우릴 구할 수 있다.”는 얘기를 한 일 등등을 죄다 알려주었지요.
그러자 그의 엄마가 “그건 아무래도 좋은 일이 아닐 게다. 돌아갈 때 신성한 물을 담은 물병을 가지고 가 그녀들의 얼굴에 몇 방울 떨어뜨려 보거라.”라고 말했어요.
그는 다시 돌아와 조마조마해하면서도 자고 있는 그녀들의 얼굴에 물을 떨어뜨렸지요. 그랬더니 그녀들의 몸이 반쯤 새하얘졌어요.
그때 세 공주 모두 벌떡 일어나더니 말했어요.
”이 저주받은 개 같으니라고, 우리 가문이 네게 복수하리니! 이제 세상의 어떤 남자도  우릴 구원하도록 다시는 운명 지워지지 못하리라! 몸을 일곱 개의 쇠사슬로 묶은, 우리 세 오빠들이 와서 너를 갈가리 찢어죽일 것이다.“
그런 다음 온 성이 흔들릴 정도의 큰 울부짖음이 들려, 남자는 황급히 창문 밖으로 뛰어내리다 다리가 그만 부러지고 말았어요.
그 사이 성은 다시 땅속을 가라앉았고요, 산도 다시 닫히는 바람에, 이 세상 누구도 그 성의 존재를 모른답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「세 명의 검은 공주」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「세 명의 검은 공주」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter137.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



138. 크노이스트와 세 아들



‘웨렐’(의미 없는 단어임)과 ‘소이스트’(의미 없는 단어임) 사이에 ‘크노이스트’(의미없는 단어임)라는 이름을 가진 남자가 살고 있었죠. 그에겐 세 아들이 있었답니다.
아들 중 한 명은 눈이 멀었고, 다른 한 명은 다리를 절룩거렸고, 세 번째 아들은 홀랑 벗고 다녔죠.
한 번은 그들이 들판으로 갔더니 산토끼 한 마리가 보이지 뭐예요.
눈이 먼 아들이 총을 쏘고, 다리를 저는 아들이 그걸 잡고, 홀랑 벗고 다니는 아들이 자신의 호주머니 속에 산토끼를 쏙 집어넣었지요.
그런 다음 그들은 어마무시하게 큰 호수에 다다랐어요.
그 호수 위에 보트 세 개가 있었어요.
보트들 중 하나는 ‘돛’(바람을 받는 큰 천)을 위로 올린 상태였고, 또 하나는 가라앉은 상태였고, 세 번째 보트는 보트바닥이 전혀 없었지요.
그들 세 명은 보트바닥이 전혀 없던 그 배에 올라탔답니다.
그런 다음 그들은 어마무시하게 큰 나무 한 그루가 있는 어마무시하게 큰 어느 숲에 도착했어요.
그 나무 안에는 어마무시하게 큰 ‘교회’(원문→예배당)가 하나 있었고, 그 교회 안에는 ‘너도밤나무 목재’(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/Kppumb )로 만들어진 ‘집사님’(원문→교회관리인) 한 분과, ‘회양 목재’(=회양목. 상자나 도장 만드는 나무. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/PMQdV4 )으로 만들어진 목사님 한 분이 ‘성수’(신성한 물)를 ‘곤봉’(몽둥이)들에 묻혀 뿌리시고 계셨어요.
“이 ‘성수’(신성한 물)에서 달아나는 자 진정 복 있으라!”
  
(동화 끝)

동화 「크노이스트와 세 아들」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「크노이스트와 세 아들」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter138.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



139. 브라켈에서 온 아가씨



‘브라켈’(독일 서쪽에 있는 도시) 출신 아가씨 한 명이, 힌네베르그 끝자락에 있는 ‘세인트 안 예배당’에 들렀지요.
그녀는 남편을 무척이나 얻길 원했는데요, 예배당에 자기 외엔 아무도 없다고 생각하고서 이렇게 노래를 불렀지요.
“오, 성스러운 세인트 엔이시어! 제가 빨리 남자를 구하게 해주세요. 당신은 그를 잘 알지. 슈트메르 문 옆에 사는 그, 머릿결이 황금빛인 그. 당신은 그를 잘 알지요.”
하지만 ‘성찬대’(탁자) 뒤에 서 있다 이 소리를 듣게 된 교회 집사님이 몹시 퉁명스런 말투로 이렇게 소리 지르셨지요.
“그 놈은 안 돼! 그 놈은 안 된다고!”
처녀는 그게 엄마 ‘앤’(누굴 말하는지 모르겠음) 옆에 서 있던 어린이 ‘메리’(여자이름)가 자신에게 소리친 줄 알고, 발끈해선 이렇게 고함질렀어요.
“엉터리, 시답잖은 것아, 입 다물지 못해, 네 엄마가 말씀 좀 하시게!”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「브라켈에서 온 아가씨」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「브라켈에서 온 아가씨」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter139.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



140. 종 (하인이나 하녀)



“어디 가니?”
“발페(독일남부의 마을)에.”
“나도 발페 가는데, 너도 발페 가니, 호, 호, 우리 함께 가자구나.”
“남편은 있니? 그의 이름은?”
“매력이야.”(원문→참Cham. 매력이란 단어에서 ‘r’이 빠진 거)
“내 남편 이름도 매력인데, 네 남편도 매력이네. 나도 발페 가고, 너도 발페 가고, 호, 호, 우리 함께 가자구나.”
“아이는 있니, 어떠니?”
“까불지.”
“내 아이도 까부는데, 네 아이도 까부는구나. 내 남편 이름도 매력인데, 네 남편도 매력이고. 나도 발페 가는데, 너도 발페 가고, 호, 호, 우리 함께 가자구나.”
“아기용 침대(요람)는 있고? 너흰 그걸 뭐라 불러?”
“‘노란 하마’(원문→히포데이저. 사실 뭔 말인지 모르겠음-_ㅜ. 쏘리~).”
“우리 집 아기용 침대도 ‘노란 하마’인데, 너희 집도 ‘노란 하마’네. 내 아이도 까부는데, 네 아이도 까불고. 내 남편 이름도 매력인데, 네 남편 이름도 매력이고. 나도 발페 가는데, 너도 발페 가고, 호, 호, 우리 함께 가자구나.”
“하인은 있니? 너희 집 하인 이름은 뭔데?”
“‘한 눈 좀 팔지 마’(원문→마하스페히트. 마하=만드는 사람. 스페히트=딱따구리)야.”
“우리 집 하인 이름도 ‘한 눈 좀 팔지 마’인데, 너희 집도 ‘한 눈 좀 팔지 마’구나. 우리 집 아기용 침대도 ‘노란 하마’인데, 너희 집 아기용 침대도 ‘노란 하마’고, 내 아이도 까부는데, 네 아이도 까불고. 내 남편 이름도 매력인데, 네 남편 이름도 매력이고. 나도 발페 가는데, 너도 발페 가고, 호, 호, 우리 함께 가자구나.”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「종 (하인이나 하녀)」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 동화들을 참조해 우리말로 해석했습니다. 

「종 (하인이나 하녀)」  
줄거리 참조 ? 영어동화 ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter140.html
단어들 참조 ? 독일어 원문 (1857년) ▶ https://de.wikisource.org/wiki/Das_Hausgesinde_(1857) 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



141. 어린 양과 작은 물고기



옛날에 서로 진심으로 사랑하는 어린 오빠와 어린 여동생이 살고 있었어요.
하지만 친엄마가 돌아가시는 바람에 그들은, 자신들을 전혀 좋아라하지 않고 몰래 해칠 생각만 하는 새엄마를 맞이해야했지요.
그러다 한번은 두 어린아이가 다른 아이들과 함께 집 앞 풀밭에서 놀고 있었어요. 거기 풀밭엔 집 한쪽과 맞닿아 있는 연못이 하나 있었어요.
아이들은 서로서로 손을 맞잡고서 그 연못을 돌면서 술래잡기를 했답니다. 
“에네케(독일식 이름) 베네케(독일식 이름), 나를 살려주렴, 그럼 내가 새를 잡아다줄게. 그 새가 지푸라기를 물어다주면, 지푸라기를 젖소에게 먹일게. 예쁜 젖소가 우유를 주면, 내가 그 우유를 빵 굽는 사람에게 줄 거고. 빵 굽는 사람이 케이크를 만들어줄 거야. 내가 그 케이크를 고양이에게 줄게. 고양이가 그 대가로 생쥐를 잡아다줄 거고, 내가 그 생쥐를 연기 위에  매달면, 그럼 넌 ‘눈’(하늘에서 내리는 눈)을 보게 될 거야.”
그들은 이 놀이를 하며 원을 그리고 서 있다, ‘눈’이라는 단어를 말할 차례가 된 아이가 내따 도망치면, 나머지 모든 아이들이 그 아이를 뒤쫓아 가 잡는 놀이었어요.
그들이 한참 흥겹게 놀고 있는 꼴을 창문을 통해 지켜보던 새엄마는 부아가 치밀었지요.
게다가 그녀는 마법을 거는 주술도 좀 이해하고 있었던지라 단번에 두 아이에게 주술을 걸어 어린 오빠는 물고기로, 그리고 어린 여동생은 어린 양으로 변하게했지요.
그때부터 그 물고기는 연못을 이리저리 헤엄쳐 다니며 아주 슬퍼했고, 어린 양은 풀밭을 위아래로 걸어 다니며 불행해져서는 풀 한포기도 먹을 수 없었거니와 설사 먹을 수 있다 해도 입도 대지 않으려 했지요.
그렇게 시간은 흐르고 흘러, 손님들이 그 성에 도착하게 되었답니다.
부정한 새엄마는 생각했어요.
“이거 참 좋은 기회잖아.”
그녀가 요리사를 불러 말했어요.
“풀밭으로 가서 새끼 양을 잡아 와 죽이거라, 손님들에게 그만한 게 없을 게다.”
그래서 요리사가 나가서 어린 양을 잡아 부엌으로 데려와 다리를 꽁꽁 묶었어요. 어린 양은 이 모든 걸 감내하며 참았지요.
요리사가 자신의 식칼을 꺼내 어린 양을 죽이기 위해 계단에다 대고 갈았어요. 그런데 작은 물고기 하나가 물에서 앞뒤로 헤엄을 쳐 부엌 싱크대 앞까지 올라와 요리사를 빤히 올려다보는 게 아니겠어요.
하지만 이건 오빠였어요. 오빠는 어린 양이 요리사에게 잡혀가는 것을 보고서 연못에서 집까지 헤엄쳐 따라왔던 거예요.
그러자 어린 양이 내려다보며 소리쳤어요.
“아, 오빠, 연못은 너무 깊지, 아 불쌍한 우리 오누이! 요리사가 내 목숨을 끊으려고 식칼을 갈고 있어.”
작은 물고기가 대답했어요.
“아, 불쌍한 내 여동생, 여기서 올려다보는데도 내 애간장이 무너지는구나.”
어린 양이 말을 할 수 있고 그리고 아래쪽에 있는 물고기 또한 슬픈 소리를 하는 걸 들은 요리사는 덜컥 겁이나 이건 분명 예사 양이 아니고 집에 있는 사악한 여자에 의해 마법에 걸린 게 분명하다고 생각했어요.
그때 요리사가 말했어요.
“안심하거라, 내 너를 죽이지 않으마.”
그는 다른 양을 데려와 손님들을 위한 음식을 만들었어요. 그리곤 그 어린 양을 착한 시골 여자에게 데려가 요리사 자신이 보고 들은 걸 전부 말해주었지요.
하지만 그 농부는 사실 어린 여동생의 유모였던 여인이었어요. 그녀는 어린 양이 누군지 단번에 알아차리고는 여자 마법사에게 데려갔어요.
여자 마법사가 어린 양과 작은 물고기를 향해 축복 기도를 해주자, 그 힘으로 아이들이 다시 인간의 모습으로 돌아올 수 있었어요.
그 이후 여자 마법사는 그들 둘을 울창한 숲 속에 있는 작은 오두막으로 데려갔어요.
거기서 그들은 혼자 힘으로 살아나가며 행복하게 만족하며 잘 살았답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「어린 양과 작은 물고기」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「어린 양과 작은 물고기」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter141.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



142. 지멜리 산



옛날에 두 형제가 살고 있었어요. 한 명은 부자인데, 다른 한 명은 가난했죠.
하지만 부자인 쪽은 가난한 동생에게 일원 한 푼도 주지 않았어요. 그래서 동생은 곡식을 파는 일을 하며 근근이 살아가고 있었죠. 그래도 종종 자신의 아내와 아이들에게 빵도 주지 못할 만큼 생활이 빈곤해지곤 했지요.
그러다 한 번은 동생이 손수레를 끌고 숲을 지나가는데 길 한쪽 편으로 크고 벌거벗은 ‘민둥산’(알몸 산)이 보이지 뭐예요. 생전 처음 보는 그런 민둥산이여서 동생이 놀라워하며 선채 보고 있었더랬죠.
그러고 있는데 저쪽에서 12명의 덩치 크고 울그락불그락한 사내들이 걸어오고 있는 게 아니겠어요, 그래서 그들이 산적일 거라 생각한 동생이 손수레를 수풀 속에 쑤셔 넣고 냅따 나루 위로 기어 올라가 무슨 일이 벌어지나 지켜보았더랬죠.
하지만 12명의 사내들은 민둥산으로 가더니 외쳤어요.
“젬지 산아, 젬지 산아, 열리거라.” 
그 즉시 민둥산 한가운데가 열리더니 열두 사내가 안으로 들어갔어요. 그들이 들어가자마자 산이 다시 닫혔지요.
하지만 잠시 후 산이 다시 열리더니, 사내들이 어깨 위로 무거운 보따리들을 한 가득 이고 나왔어요.
그들은 다시 햇빛 속으로 나오자 말했어요.
“젬지 산아, 젬지 산아, 닫히거라.”
그러자 산이 다시 닫히며, 더는 입구가 보이지 않았고, 열두 사내들도 어디론가 가버렸답니다.
그들이 완전히 사라진 후, 가난한 남자가 나무에서 내려왔는데, 그 산에 진실로 뭐가 숨겨져 있을지 호기심이 마구 생기는 거예요.
그래서 그가 민둥산으로 가 말했어요.
“젬지 산아, 젬지 산아, 열리거라.”
산이 그에게도 열렸어요.
그가 안으로 들어가 보니, 온 산이 은과 금으로 가득한 동굴이었어요. 뒤쪽으로는 진주와 반짝이는 보석들이 마치 옥수수처럼 수북이 쌓여 있었고요.
가난한 남자는 어찌해야할지를 몰라 보물엔 하나도 손을 안 대려했지만 결국엔 호주머니에 금화를 가득 채우긴 했어요. 다만 그래도 진주와 보석이 있는 쪽에는 손도 대지 않았지요.
다시 밖으로 나온 그가 말했어요.
“젬지 산아, 젬지 산아, 닫히거라.”
산이 스르르 닫히자, 그는 자신의 손수레를 끌고 집으로 왔어요.
이제 더는 걱정거리가 없어졌어요. 아내와 아이들에게도 빵을 사줄 수 있었을뿐더러, 포도주 장사에도 손을 댈 수 있었거든요.
그는 즐겁고 정직하게 살아갔고, 가난한 사람들도 도와주며, 만나는 모든 이들에게 선을 베풀었어요.
하지만 돈이 다시 떨어지자, 그는 형에게 가서 양을 헤아릴 수 있는 ‘나무그릇’(원문→되. 곡식의 양을 헤아리는 나무그릇인 ‘되’. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/nzOnkx )를 하나 빌려와 이번엔 좀 더 금화를 담아왔어요. 다만 이번에도 값나가는 귀중품들엔 손도 대지 않았더랬죠.
그가 세 번째로 금화를 담아오려고 나무그릇을 다시 빌리려 형에게 갔어요.
하지만 부자 형은 동생의 재산에 질투심이 나기 시작한지 오래였죠. 게다가 동생이 시작하는 장사마다 잘 되니 도대체 그 장상밑천이 어디서 나는 건지 도통 이해할 수가 없었죠.
그러던 찰나 동생이 또 나무그릇을 빌리려오자, 교활한 속임수가 하나 떠오른 형이 그 나무그릇 밑에 ‘역청’(=아스팔트)을 발라놓았죠. 그리고 그 나무그릇을 다시 돌려받았을 때 보니 밑에 금화가 하나 딱 달라붙어있지 뭐예요.
그가 냉큼 동생에게 달려가 물었지요.
“너 이 나무그릇으로 뭘 잰 거야?”
“옥수수랑 보리요.”라며 상대방이 말했어요.
그러자 형이 금화 한 닢을 보여주며 당장 바른 대로 말하지 않으면 재판소에 고소해버리겠다고 협박했어요.
불쌍한 남자는 그제야 모든 걸 형에게 얘기했죠. 그동안 있었던 일들을 모두 말이예요.
하지만 부자 형은 냉큼 자신의 마차를 준비시키더니 몰고 갔어요. 이번에야말로 동생보다 한 몫 단단히 챙겨 와 확연한 부의 차이를 만들 참이었지요.
그 산에 도착한 형이 소리 질렀어요.
“젬지 산아, 젬지 산아, 열리거라.”
산이 열리자 그가 들어갔지요.
눈앞에 수북이 놓여있는 보물들에 입이 딱 벌어진 그 또한 뭘 먼저 집을지 몰랐답니다.
마침내 그가 보석들을 까짓것 담았어요.
그가 다시 밖으로 나가려는데, 그만 보물에만 온통 마음과 영혼이 팔리다 보니 이 산의 이름을 까먹고 말았지 뭐예요.
그래서 그가 외쳤지요.
“지멜리 산아, 지멜리 산아, 열리거라.”
하지만 그건 올바른 이름이 아니었어요. 그래서 산이 꿈쩍도 하지 않고 계속 닫힌 상태로 있었죠.
그 바람에 더 놀란 그의 생각이 혼돈에 혼돈을 거듭하며 더 꼬여만 갔고, 이젠 보물이고 뭐고 그에겐 전혀 중요하지 않았지요.
저녁이 되어 산이 열리더니 열두 산적들이 들어왔어요.
그들은 그를 보자마자 비웃으며 고함을 질렀어요.
“이 놈, 기어이 걸렸구나! 네가 여길 두 번이나 훔쳐간 걸 우리가 몰랐는줄 아느냐? 그동안 너를 잡을 수 없었다만, 세 번째는 그냥 나가지 못한다!”
그때 그가 소리쳤어요.
“아닙니다, 제가 아니에요, 그건 제 동생이라고요.”
하지만 그가 싹싹 빌며 살려 달라 말하고 죄다 말하려는데, 그만 그들이 그의 머리를 댕강 자르고 말았답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「지멜리 산」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「지멜리 산」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter142.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



143. 여행



옛날에 아들 하나를 둔 가난한 여인이 살고 있었어요.
아들은 여행을 떠나길 무척이나 원했어요.
하지만 엄마는 말했어요.
“네가 어떻게 여행을 가겠다는 거니? 네가 가지고 갈 돈 한 푼 없는데.”
그러자 아들이 말했어요.
“제가 한 번 그럭저럭 해나가 볼게요. 항상 이렇게 말할 거거든요, 많지 않네요, 많지 않아요, 많지 않다고요.”
그리하여 그는 오랫동안 걸으며 항상 이렇게 말했지요.
“많지 않네요, 많지 않아요, 많지 않다고요.”
때마침 그가 어부들이 모여 있는 곳을 지나가게 되어 이렇게 말했어요.
“건승(=성공)을 빕니다! 많지 않네요, 많지 않아요, 많지 않다고요.”
“저 촌뜨기가 지금 뭐라는 거야, 뭐 ‘많지 않다’고?”
그리고 그물이 끌어올려졌을 때 그들이 잡은 물고기가 정말로 많지 않았어요.
그래서 그들 중 한 명이 확 그냥 몽둥이를 집어 들곤 이 젊은이에게 달려들며 말했어요.
“비오는 날 먼지 나도록 맞아본 적 없지?”
“그럼, 제가 뭐라고 말해야하는데요?”라며 젊은이가 말했지요.
“이렇게 말해야지, ‘많이 잡으세요, 가득 잡으세요.’라고.”
이후 그는 오랫동안 다시 걸으며 말했지요.
“많이 잡으세요, 가득 잡으세요.”
그러다 그가 교수대에 도착해보니, 어느 불쌍한 죄수가 이제 막 목이 매달리려고 하고 있었어요.
그러자 그가 말했어요.
“안녕하세요. 많이 잡으세요, 가득 잡으세요.”
“무슨 악당 같은 소릴 하는 거야, 많이 잡으라니? 이 세상에 사악한 인간들이 더 많다는 걸 굳이 말해야겠다는 거냐?”
그래서 사람들이 그의 등짝을 몇 대 후려갈겼지요.
“그럼, 제가 뭐라 말해야하는 데요?”라고 그가 말했어요.
“이렇게 말해야해, 불쌍한 영혼에게 신의 자비가 있기를.”
젊은이가 다시 오랫동안 걸으며 말했어요.
“불쌍한 영혼에게 신의 자비가 있기를!”
때마침 그가 땅 구덩이를 지나가는데 그 옆에서 가축 도살업자가 말을 싹둑싹둑 자르고 있었어요.
젊은이가 말했지요.
“안녕하세요, 불쌍한 영혼에게 신의 자비가 있기를!”
“뭐야 이놈아, 너 성질 더러운 악당이냐?”
그 가축 도살업자가 그의 귀방망이를 한 방 세게 때렸어요. 그 바람 그가 앞을 볼 수 없었지요.
“그럼, 제가 뭐라 말해야하는데요?”
“이렇게 말해야지, ‘썩은 고기는 시궁창(=구덩이)에!’”
그래서 그가 다시 걸으며 항상 이렇게 말했어요.
“썩은 고기는 시궁창에, 썩은 고기는 시궁창에.”
때마침 사람들을 가득 태운 마차가 지나가기에 그가 이렇게 말했지요.
“안녕들 하세요, 썩은 고기는 시궁창에!”
그때 마차가 정말로 구덩이에 빠졌어요. 그러자 마부가 채찍을 들어 젊은이가 벌벌 기어 엄마에게 간신히 돌아갔을 정도로 후려갈겼어요.
이후 젊은이는 살면서 두 번 다시는 여행이란 걸 하지 않았답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「여행」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「여행」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter143.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



144. 당나귀 왕자



옛날 옛적에 왕과 왕비님이 살고 계셨어요. 그들은 부자였죠. 다만 그들에게도 부족한 게 딱 하나 있었는데 바로 자식이 없다는 거예요.
왕비는 밤낮으로 슬픔에 잠겨 말했어요.
“난 아무 것도 자라지 않는 어느 들판과 같아.”
마침내 신께서 그녀의 소망을 들어주셔서 그녀가 아이를 출산하게 되었지요.
그런데 그녀가 낳은 건 인간의 아이가 아니라 어린 당나귀였어요.
엄마(왕비)가 그걸 보시곤 비탄에 잠겨 통곡을 하시며 “당나귀를 키우느니 차라리 애가 없는 게 낫다”라고 말하더니 정말로 물고기들에게 잡아먹히게 강물에 던져버리려 했어요.
하지만 왕이 말했죠.
“아니오, 신이 보낸 내 아들이자 상속자요. 내가 죽은 후 왕좌(왕의 의자)에 올라 왕관을 쓰게 될 내 아들이란 말이오.”
그리하여 그 당나귀는 키워지게 되었고 무럭무럭 자랐지요. 그의 두 귀로 참 아름답게도 높게 곧게 쭉쭉 자랐답니다. 
게다가 그는 성향이 명량해 이리저리 뛰어다니며 잘도 놀았는데, 특히나 음악을 좋아라했어요. 
결국 그(당나귀 왕자)가 유명한 연주가를 찾아가 말했지요.
“당신의 기술을 제게도 가르쳐주십시오, 저도 당신만큼이나 ‘류트’(16세기 기타. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/l6EkrF )를 잘 연주하고 싶습니다.”
“아아, 어린 군주시여,”라며 그 연주가가 대답했어요. “이건 당신에게 거친 악기입니다. 당신의 손가락들은 이 악기에 적합지 않습니다. 너무도 당황스럽게 크시거든요. 결국 악기의 줄들이 끊어질까 걱정입니다.”
그래도 소용없었죠.
당나귀 왕자는 어쨌건 류트를 연주해야겠다고 결심했거든요.
그는 꾸준히 참 열심히도 배웠어요, 그래서 결국은 스승만큼 류트(기타)를 연주하게 되었지요.
어린 군주가 한번은 상념(생각)에 잠겨 걷다 그만 샘에 도착했는데 우연히도 그 안에 비친 자신의 얼굴을 들여다보고 말았지요… 물이 어찌나 맑은지 당나귀의 모습이 그대로 비춰졌거든요.
그의 상심은 이만저만이 아니었어요. 그래서 그는 충직한 말동무 하나만 데리고 드넓은 세상으로 나갔어요.
그들은 이리저리 여행을 다니다 결국 나이 든 왕이 다스리는 왕국에 도착하게 되었지요. 그 왕에겐 기똥차게 아름다운 딸이 한 분 계셨답니다.
당나귀 왕자가 말했어요.
“여기 머물자구나.”
그래서 성문을 두드리며 소리쳤죠.
“들어가게 문을 열거라.”
하지만 성문이 열릴 리가 없었죠. 그래서 그는 앉아 ‘류트’(기타)를 꺼낸 다음 두 앞발로 기가 막힌 연주를 뽑아냈죠.
그러자 문지기의 두 눈이 휘둥그레져선 황급히 왕에게 가 알렸어요.
“성문밖에 웬 젊은 당나귀가 류트(기타)를 연주하는데 정말이지 뛰어난 연주가만큼이나 기똥찹니다요!”
“그래, 그럼 그 연주가를 데려오거라.”라며 왕이 말했지요.
하지만 들어온 것이 영락없는 그냥 당나귀였기에 모든 사람들이 그 류트 연주가(왕자)를 비웃기 시작했지요.
그런 다음 그 당나귀는 하인들과 함께 자리에 앉아 식사를 하란 얘길 들었지요.
하지만 그는 꺼려하며 말했어요.
“저는 그저 그런 마구간의 당나귀가 아니라, 고귀한 당나귀입니다.”
그러자 사람들이 말했어요.
“네가 정 아니꼽다면, 그럼 병사들과 같이 앉아 식사를 하거라.”
“아니라니까요,”라며 그가 말했어요. “저는 왕 옆에 앉겠습니다.”
왕이 미소를 보내며 쾌활한 어조로 말했어요.
“그래, 네 뜻대로 하거라, 어린 당나귀, 내 옆으로 오거라.”
그런 다음 왕이 물었어요.
“어린 당나귀야, 내 딸아이가 무척 마음에 들지?”
당나귀가 그녀 쪽으로 고개를 돌려 쳐다보더니 고개를 끄떡이며 말했어요.
“그녀가 터무니없을 정도로 마음에 듭니다. 생전 저렇게 아름다운 여인을 본 적이 없습니다.”
“그래, 그럼, 저 애 옆에 앉거라.”라며 왕이 말했어요.
“제가 바라던 바입니다.”라며 당나귀가 말했어요.
그리하여 그는 그녀 옆에 자리를 잡고 앉아 먹고 마시게 되었는데, 그 행동이 어찌나 품위 있고 청결하든지요.
어쨌건 그 고귀한 짐승이 한동안 왕의 궁궐에서 머물고 났을 때였어요. 그가 생각했죠.
‘이게 다 내게 무슨 소용인가, 그냥 집으로 돌아가는 게 낫지 않을까?’ 
그가 슬픈 듯 고개를 늘어뜨리며 왕께 나아가 자신을 추방시켜 달라 청했어요.
하지만 왕은 이미 그가 무척이나 마음에 들던 차라 이렇게 말했지요.
“어린 당나귀야, 뭐가 고민이니? 네 얼굴이 마치 식초 한 병을 다 마신 듯 쓰라려 보이는구나. 네가 바라는 건 뭐든 주겠노라. 그래 금을 줄까?”
“아니오,”라며 당나귀가 말하며 고개를 흔들었어요.
“그럼 보석이나 값진 드레스를 줄까?”
“아닙니다.”
“그럼 내 왕국의 절반을 줄까?”
“정말로, 그게 아닙니다.”
그러자 왕이 말했어요.
“그럼 내 마음에 들 만한 내게 알려다오. 내 예쁜 딸아이를 아내로 줄까?”
“아아, 네.”라며 당나귀가 말했어요. “전 정말로 그녀가 좋습니다.”
불시에 그의 얼굴이 아주 명량해지고 행복해져보였어요. 왜긴요, 그가 정말로 오매불망 바랐던 게 그녀였으니까 그렇죠. 
그리하여 성대하고 화려한 결혼식이 거행되었답니다.
저녁이 되자, 새색시와 신랑은 침실로 안내받았지요. 
그리고 왕은 당나귀가 어찌 처신하는지 알고 싶어 하인을 몰래 그 방에 잠복하게 시켰답니다.
그들 둘 다 들어서자, 신랑이 방문의 빗장(가로막대기)을 단단히 걸며 주변을 둘러보며 아무도 없는 걸 확인하곤 별안간 자신의 당나귀 가죽을 벗고 당당하고 젊은 왕자님의 형상을 하고서 거기 서 있었지요.
“자,”라며 그가 말했어요. “내가 누군지 보시구려, 내가 당신에게 보잘 것 없다 사려(생각)치 마시구려.”
그러자 신부는 너무너무 기뻐 그에게 키스를 하고 진실로 사랑했어요.
아침이 되자 그가 벌떡 일어나더니 자신의 동물 가죽을 다시 입었어요.
그리되니 누구도 그 가죽 안에 누가 숨어 있는지 알 수 없었답니다.
곧 나이 드신 왕이 들어오셨어요.
“아아,”라며 그가 말했어요. “어린 당나귀야 즐겁니?” 그리곤 딸애를 바라보며 말했지요. “그래 넌 남편으로 합당한 남자를 얻지 못한 게 못내 아쉬워 슬픈 거구나?” 
“오오, 아니에요, 사랑하는 아빠, 저는 그 이가 이 세상에서 가장 잘생긴 남자인 마냥 사랑하는 걸요, 제 숨이 다하는 날까지 그 이와 살래요.”
왕은 놀랐어요.
하지만 숨어 있게 했던 하인이 와 모든 걸 보고했죠.
왕이 말했어요.
“그럴 리가.”
“그러시다면 오늘 밤에 직접 보시옵소서. 그리고 여쭙자면, 왕이시어, 만약 그가 가죽을 벗거든 집어다 불에 던져 넣어 그가 이제부터라도 본래 모습을 내보일 수밖에 없게 하소서.”
“그 제안이 괜찮군.”라며 왕이 말했어요.
그리고 그들이 잠이 든 밤에 왕은 몰래 들어왔지요. 왕이 침대에 도착해보니 정말로 가죽이 벗겨져 있고 달빛을 받아 어김없이 왕자님으로 보이는 젊은이가 거기 누워 있었지요. 바닥에 가죽이 늘 부러진 채 말이죠.
그래서 왕이 그걸 집어 나와, 밖에 큰 불을 피우게 하곤, 그 가죽을 불에 던져버리곤 완전히 타 재가 될 때까지 몸소 자리를 지켰어요.
하지만 자신의 가죽을 빼앗긴 사내가 어찌 처신할지 내심 걱정이 되어, 밤새 지키느라 깨어있었답니다.
잠이 들었던 젊은이는 아침 첫 빛줄기에 일어나 자신의 당나귀 가죽을 다시 입으러 보았지만 그 어디에도 가죽이 보이지 않았어요.
이에 깜짝 놀란 그가 비탄(슬픔)과 근심에 겨워 말했어요.
“이제 여기서 탈출하는 방법을 강구해야겠구나.”
하지만 그가 밖에 나왔을 땐, 왕이 이미 거기 서 있다 말했어요.
“내 아들아, 어딜 그리 바삐 가르느냐? 무슨 상념(생각)이더냐? 여기서 머물거라, 이제 네가 이토록 잘생긴 사내인줄을 알았으니 다신 너를 보내지 않으련다. 내 너에게 내 왕국의 절반을 주겠다, 그리고 내가 죽고 나면 왕국 전체를 물려주겠노라.”
“시작이 이리 좋듯 끝도 좋으리라 바래마지 않습니다. 당신과 함께 머물겠습니다.”라며 젊은이가 말했어요.
그래서 나이 든 왕은 사위에게 왕국의 절반을 주었답니다. 그리고 1년 후 왕이 돌아가시자, 젊은이가 왕국 전체를 물려받게 되었죠.
그리고 그의 친아빠까지 돌아가신 후에는 또 다른 왕국도 마찬가지로 물려받았고요, 그리하여 그는 참말로 웅장하고 씩씩하게 잘도 살았답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「당나귀 왕자」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「당나귀 왕자」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter144.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



145. 은혜를 모르는 아들



한 남자와 그의 아내가 한번은 현관문 옆에 앉아 있다가, 앞에 구운 통닭을 놓고 막 먹으려던 참이었어요.
그때 나이 든 아버지가 오시는 게 보였어요. 그러자 서둘러 통닭을 쥐더니 감춰버렸어요. 왜냐면 남자는 아버지에게 조금도 나눠주기 싫었기 때문이지요.
노인은 와서 물 한 모금만 마시고는 떠났어요.
그제야 아들은 구운 통닭을 식탁 위에 다시 꺼내 먹으려고 막 손으로 집어 들자마자, 그게 커다란 두꺼비로 변해 펄쩍하고 그의 얼굴에 뛰어들어 내려앉더니 결코 다시는 떨어지지 않았어요.
게다가 누구든 그의 얼굴에서 두꺼비를 떼려고 하면, 두꺼비가 마치 상대방의 얼굴로 뛰어들 기세 마냥 독기를 잔뜩 머금고 쳐다보는 바람에, 누구도 손도 대지 못했죠.
그리하여 부모님의 은혜를 모르는 아들은 반강제적으로 그 두꺼비에게 매일 같이 먹이를 주어야했답니다. 그렇지 않으면 두꺼비가 그의 얼굴을 먹을 수 있었거든요.
그리고 그렇게 해서 아들은 쉼 없이 세상을 ‘방랑’(떠돌아다님)해야 했답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「은혜를 모르는 아들」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「은혜를 모르는 아들」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter145.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



146. 커다란 무



옛날에 병사로 복무하는 두 형제가 있었어요.
형은 부자였고, 동생은 가난했죠.
가난에서 벗어나기 위해 동생은 군복을 벗고 농부가 되었어요.
그는 조그만 땅을 파고 일구어 ‘순무’(먹는 무의 일종. 사진링크▶ https://goo.gl/VPOB5B ) 씨를 뿌렸죠.
그 씨앗들이 싹을 트고 나왔는데, 유독 한 순무만이 엄청 커고 원기 왕성하게 자라 눈에 뛸 정도로 커지고 또 커지더니 급기야는 자람을 절대 멈추지 않을 듯 까짓 것 자라났어요.
그 바람에 ‘순무의 여왕’이라 불리게 되었지요.
왜냐면 이제껏 아무도 그런 순무를 본 적이 없었고 앞으로도 볼 성 싶지 않았기 때문이지요.
결국 그건 너무도 거대해져 달구지 하나를 가득 채우고도 황소 두 마리가 간진히 끌 수 있었지요.
그래서 농부는 도대체 이 순무를 어찌 처리해야할지를 알 수가 없었어요. 이게 그에게 행운일까요, 아님 불행의 시작일까요?
마침내 그가 결심했어요.
‘이걸 팔아봤자 얼마나 남을 것이며, 그렇다고 이걸 내가 먹어봤자, 작은 순무 맛과 별반 다를 게 없지 않겠어. 차라리 왕께 가져가 선물로 받치는 게 낫겠어.’
그래서 그가 순무를 달구지에 담고 황소 두 마리로 끌게 해 궁으로 가 왕께 선물로 받쳤어요.
“이 진기한 것이 무엇인고?”라며 왕이 말했어요. “내 이때껏 신기한 걸 많이 봐 왔다만, 이런 괴물 같이 생긴 건 또 처음이구나! 이건 무슨 씨앗에서 자란 것이냐, 아님 행운아인 네가 우연히 얻은 것이냐?”
“아, 아닙니다요!”라며 농부가 말했어요. “저는 행운아가 아니라, 그저 가난한 병사입니다요. 한때 병사였는데 살림살이가 너무 힘들어 군복을 벗고 땅을 일군 거지요. 제 형은 부자라 왕께서도 아실 테지만, 저는 가난해 아무도 모르 옵지요.”
그러자 왕이 그에게 무척 동정심을 느낀 나머지 말했어요.
“내 너의 가난함을 벗게 해주겠노라, 너를 내 선물로 네 부자 형만큼이나 부유하게 해주마.”
그런 다음 왕은 그에게 많은 금과 땅과 풀밭과 약초들을 주어 즉시 부자로 만들어주었어요. 이리 되니 동생의 부유함이 형과 비교되지도 않을 만큼 부유해졌지요.
부자 형은 가난한 동생이 순무 한 개로 횡재를 했다는 말을 듣고 열불이 나 매일 어떻게 하면 자신도 똑같은 행운을 거머쥘까 골똘히 생각했죠.
하지만 많은 생각을 해본 결과 가장 좋은 방법은 역시나 금과 말을 왕께 바치고 그 답례로 더 많은 선물을 받는 것이었어요.
순무 한 개로 그렇게 큰 부자가 됐다면 이런 많은 선물을 바칠 경우 그가 받을 대가는 어마어마하지 않겠어요?
왕은 그의 선물을 받곤, “답례로 그 거대한 순무만한 게 없지.”라고 말하며 달랑 순무 한 개만 주곤 더는 아무 것도 주지 않았답니다.
그래서 부자 형은 동생의 순무를 달구지에 담고 집까지 끌고 와야 했어요.
그 바람에 벅이 받친 그가 급기야 동생을 죽일 결심을 하게 되었어요.
즉 살인자들을 고용한 거지요. 
형은 살인자들을 매복시키고는, 동생한테 가 말했어요.
“사랑하는 동생, 숨겨진 보물을 내가 아는데, 우리 함께 가서 파세나, 그리고 둘이 같이 나누자고.”
상대방이 이에 동의해 아무런 의심 없이 동행했지요.
하지만 그들이 가는 도중, 그 살인자들이 동생을 덮치더니 포박해 나무에 매달아버렸어요.
그들이 막 일을 처리하려는데, 멀찍이에서 말발굽소리와 함께 노래 부르는 소리가 크게 났어요.
이에 그들이 화들짝 놀라 포로를 머리부터 자루 속에 밀어 넣어 나뭇가지에 매달곤 달아나버렸어요.
하지만 동생은 안에서 까짓것 노력해 자루에 구멍을 하나 내고 머리만이라도 밖으로 내밀 수 있었죠.
오고 있던 사람은 다름 아닌 여행 중인 학생이었어요.
젊은 친구가 말을 타고서 즐겁게 노래를 부르며 숲을 지나고 있었죠.
위에서 보고 있다 그가 아래로 지나갈 때쯤 동생이 소리쳤어요.
“안녕하슈! 때마침 잘 오셨네.”
학생이 주변을 둘러보았지만 그 목소리가 어디서 나는지 알 수 없었죠.
마침내 학생이 말했어요.
“어디서 나는 소리죠?”
그때 대답이 나무 꼭대기에서 들려왔어요.
“눈을 들어보게. 난 지금 지혜의 자루 안에 앉아 있다네. 순식간에 많은 걸 배웠지. 어찌나 많이 배웠는지 모든 학교를 조롱거리로 만들만큼 배웠다네. 여기 앉아 배우게 되면 이 세상 누구보다 똑똑해져 내려가게 되지. 난 별도 알고, 12궁(별자리)도 알고, 바람의 흔적이며, 바다의 모래며, 질병의 치유며, 약초와 새들과 돌들의 쓰임에 대해 도통했다네. 만약 자네도 여기 한 번만 들어와 보면 지혜 한 보따리를 거머쥐고 무궁무진하게 고귀하게 될 걸세.”
그 말을 들은 학생이 감탄해하며 말했어요.
“제가 당신을 만난 게 정말 복입니다요! 저도 한 번만 그 자루 속으로 들어가볼 수 있을까요?”
동생은 마치 싫다는 듯 대꾸했어요.
“잠깐만 내 자넬 들여보내주지, 만약 자네가 내게 답례를 하고 좋은 말을 해준다면 말일세. 하지만 1시간은 더 기다려야하네. 왜냐면 내가 아직 배울 게 좀 남았거든.”
학생은 잠시 기다리다 더 초조해져선 빨리 자기 좀 들여보내 달라고 아우성이었어요. 그만큼 지식의 샘에 목이 말랐던 거죠.
그래서 동생은 사뭇 못 이기는 척하며 말했어요.
“자네가 끈을 아래로 당겨 내가 지혜의 집에서 내려가게 하게나, 그런 다음 자네가 들어오면 된다네.”
그래서 학생은 자루를 아래로 내려 끈을 풀고는 그를 구해준 다음 소리쳤어요.
“자 이제 제 차례라고요.”
학생이 막 자루 속으로 들어가려는데, 동생이 난데없이 “잠깐!”이라고 말하더니 “그렇게 들어가면 안 되네.”라고 말하며 학생의 머리를 잡곤 거꾸로 자루 속에 집어넣곤 끈을 묶은 다음 지혜의 제자를 끈을 끌어당겨 나무 위에 매달았어요.
그렇게 동생은 학생을 공중에 대롱대롱 매단 다음 말했어요.
“어찌 해볼 만하겠지, 친구? 지혜가 물밀 듯 밀려드는 게 느껴지지 않는가, 그게 다 소중한 경험이 되는 거라네. 더 지혜로워질 때까지 잠자코 거기 있게나.”
그 후 즉시 동생은 학생의 말을 타고 떠나버렸어요.
하지만 1시간 안에 사람을 보내 학생을 다시 풀어주었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「커다란 무」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「커다란 무」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter146.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



147. 젊어진 노인



예수님이 이 땅을 걸으실 적에, 어느 날 저녁 예수님과 성 베드로가 대장장이의 집에 들러 하룻밤을 묵게 되었어요.
그때 가난한 거지가 한 명 지나갔어요. 무척 나이 많고 쇠약한 모습이었어요. 그가 이 집에 와 대장장이에게 구걸을 좀 해주십사 부탁했어요.
그를 불쌍히 여긴 성 베드로가 말했어요.
“주님, 부디 그의 고통을 치유해 그가 자기 힘으로 빵을 구할 수 있게 해주시겠나이까.”
주님이 상냥하게 말했어요.
“대장장이, 자네 ‘가마’(용광로) 좀 빌리겠네, 석탄도 좀 넣게나, 그럼 내가 이 병약한 어르신을 다시 젊은이로 만들 테니.”
대장장이가 기꺼이 동의했습니다.
성 베드로가 ‘풀무질’(불을 지필 때 풀무질로 바람을 불어넣어줌)을 하였습니다.
석탄불이 크고 세게 불꽃을 튀기자 우리 주님께서 그 불쌍한 노인네를 인도하시어 빨갛게 달아오른 불 속 가마 안으로 밀어 넣었습니다.
그 바람에 노인이 장미 나무처럼 빨갛게 달아오르며 큰 목소리로 하느님을 찬양했습니다. 
그런 다음 주님이 물통으로 가시더니 빨갛게 달아오른 그 작은 남자를 물에 담그셨습니다. 물이 그를 에워 쌓습니다.
주님은 그를 조심스레 식힌 다음 축복을 내려주셨습니다.
그러자 작은 남자가 민첩하게 일어서는데 보니, 이제 갓 20세가 된 젊은이 마냥 생기 있고 허리가 펴 있고 건강했습니다. 
이 모든 광경을 주의 깊고 세심하게 지켜보게 된 대장장이가 그들 모두를 저녁식사에 초대했습니다.
하지만 그에겐 눈이 반쯤… 멀었고 허리가 꼬부라진 장모님이 한 분 계셨지요. 장모님은 젊은이에게 가더니 불이 얼마만큼 그를 달구었는지를 아주 열심히 물으셨습니다.
젊은이가 대답하기를, 지금껏 이보다 포근할 수 없었다 말하고, 이글거리던 불 속이 이슬 맺힌 듯 시원했다 말했습니다.
젊은이의 말이 늙은 여인의 귀에 밤새 메아리를 쳐댔습니다.
다음날 일찍 주님이 대장장이에게 한없는 고마움을 표하시고는 다시 여행길에 오르셨습니다.
대장장이는 생각했어요.
‘똑같이만 하면 우리 장모님도 다시 젊어지게 할 수 있지 않을까.’
게다가 그는 모든 걸 주의 깊게 보았을 뿐만 아니라, 달구고 식히는 것은 원래 그의 직업이었으니까요.
그래서 그가 장모님을 불러,
“장모님 18세 처녀로 돌아가고 싶지 않으세요?”
라고 물었습니다. 
그녀가 말했어요.
“암 기꺼이, 다시 젊어질 수만 있다면야.”
그리하여 대장장이가 큰 불씨를 만들고 늙은 여인을 그 속에 집어던졌습니다.
그녀가 이리 저리 사방으로 몸부림을 치며 괴로워하며 끔찍한 비명을 입 밖으로 냈습니다.
“가만히 좀 앉아계시라고요. 그렇게 사방팔방으로 비명을 지르고 뛰시면 어떠해요?”라며 그가 고함을 쳤어요.
동시에 그는 그 말을 하면서도 계속 풀무질을 하여 마침내 그녀의 옷들이 홀라당 다 탈 때까지 계속 바람을 집어넣었어요.
늙은 여인이 쉼 없이 비명을 지르자, 대장장이가 속으로 생각했어요.
‘이게 아닌가.’
그래서 그가 그녀를 끄집어내어 물통 속에댜 집어넣었습니다.
그러자 그녀가 아주 큰 비명소리를 질러, 2층에 있던 대장장이의 아내와 ‘그녀’(대장장이의 아내)의 며느리가 이 소리를 듣고 아래층으로 달려 내려와 보니, 늙은 여인이 물통 속에 담가져 울부짖고 외치고 있었어요. 그녀는 이번 일로 혼이 쏙 나간 듯 주름지고 쪼글쪼글한 모습이 훨씬 더 심해져있었어요.
그래서 각각 아이를 임신하고 있던 두 여성은 너무도 놀라 그날 밤 바로 두 소년을 출산하고 말았는데, 그녀들이 낳은 자식은 사람이 아니라 원숭이였어요.
이들 원숭이들이 숲으로 도망쳤는데요, 이들이 바로 원숭이들의 원조랍니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「젊어진 노인」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「젊어진 노인」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter147.html  

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



148. 하느님의 동물과 악마의 동물



주 하느님이 모든 동물들을 창조하셨어요. 그리곤 늑대를 선택해 자신의 멍멍이로 삼어셨죠. 하지만 하느님도 염소는 깜빡하셨답니다.
그때 악마가 냉큼 달려오더니 자신과 닮은 걸 창조했어요, 멋진 긴 고리를 가진 염소였죠.
이때부터 염소들이 풀밭으로 갈 때면, 꼬리들이 산울타리에 자꾸 끼었어요. 그러자 악마가 거기까지 와 꼼짝달싹 못하는 염소들을 풀어주었죠.
하도 이런 일이 많자 악마도 화딱지가 나 모든 염소들의 꼬리를 물어서 끊어버렸답니다. 이리하여 염소들의 꼬리는 오늘날까지도 몽땅한 거예요.
악마가 염소들을 또 풀밭에 풀어두었죠.
그러다 하루는 주 하느님께서도 염소들이 과일 나무와 신성한 포도며 다른 보드라운 풀들을 죄다 갉아먹고 있다는 것을 주지하시게 된 거죠.
이게 하느님을 슬프게 했어요. 그래서 자비와 우애의 차원에서 자신의 늑대들을 부르셨지요. 늑대들이 곧 밖에 있던 염소들을 갈가리 찢었어요.
이 사실을 알게 된 악마가 발끈해선 하느님 앞에 가선 말했지요.
“당신의 창조물들이 제 걸 죽였습니다.”
하느님이 대답하셨어요.
“너는 왜 그런 해로운 것을 만들었느냐?”
악마가 말했죠.
“저도 어쩔 수 없었다고요, 내 머리 속에 든 게 죄다 사악한 짓뿐인데, 제가 만드는 것도 뻔할 뻔자 아니겠습니까, 그나저나 제 손해에 대해 어서 물어주시기나 하세요.”
“떡갈나무 잎사귀들이 떨어질 때 돈을 주마. 그때 오거라, 네 돈은 그때까지 준비해 두겠다.”
떡갈나무 잎사귀들이 떨어지고 나자, 악마가 오더니 자신이 받기로 한 돈을 달라며 요구했어요. 
하지만 하느님이 말씀하셨지요.
“콘스탄티노플(터키 이스탄불)에 있는 교회 안에 큰 떡갈나무 한 그루가 서 있는데, 그 잎사귀는 아직 달려 있단다.”
꼭지가 돈 악마가 무례한 욕설을 내뱉더니 획 가버리더니 그 떡갈나무가 정말 있는지 보려고 장장 6개월 동안 황야(황무지)를 방황한 끝에 그 떡갈나무를 찾았어요.
악마가 다시 돌아와 보니, 그 새 또 모든 떡갈나무들이 푸르른 잎사귀들을 피었지 뭐예요.
이리하여 악마는 보상금을 받을 수 없게 되었지요.
화가 머리끝까지 난 악마가 남아 있던 모든 염소들의 눈을 뽑고는 대신 자신의 눈을 박아버렸어요.
이것이 바로 왜 모든 염소들이 악마의 눈을 가지게 되었고, 염소들의 꼬리가 물어 뜯은 거 같고, 염소들이 악마의 모습과 닮았는지에 대한 이유랍니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「하느님의 동물과 악마의 동물」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「하느님의 동물과 악마의 동물」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter148.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



149. 닭장의 홰(나무 막대)



옛날에 사람들 한 가득 모아놓고 서서 자신의 신기한 마법을 보여주는 요술쟁이가 한 명 있었어요.
그 중에 제일은, 수탉이 무거운 닭장의 ‘홰’(나무 막대. 닭이 홰 위에 앉음)를 마치 깃털 마냥 가볍게 드는 거였지요.
때마침 방금 막 네 잎 ‘클로버’(토끼풀)를 주워 총명해진 소녀도 그 자리에 함께 있었는데, 그녀는 너무도 총명해져 어떤 속임수도 그녀에게 통하지 않았죠. 그래서 그녀는 수탉이 든 무거워 보이는 닭장의 ‘홰’(나무 막대)가 단지 지푸라기 하나에 지나지 않음을 금방 알아챘어요.
그래서 소녀가 소리쳤어요.
“보세요들, 수탉이 든 건 닭장의 ‘홰’(나무 막대)가 아니라, 그냥 지푸라기 하나에 지나지 않다는 게 안 보이시나요?”
그 즉시 요술은 사라지고, 사람들도 진상을 파악하고, 그 마술사에게 창피와 면박을 잔뜩 주고 멀리 쫓아버렸어요.
하지만 그는 마음속 분노가 엄청나 이렇게 말하기에 이르렀죠.
“내 곧 복수하고 말 테다?”
한참 후에 그 소녀의 결혼식 날이 되었어요.
그래서 그녀가 ‘치장’(신부복장)을 하고서 사람들의 큰 행렬 속에 끼어 들판을 가로질러 교회가 있는 곳까지 갔어요.
그녀가 시내에 도착하니 갑자기 시냇물이 가득 넘치는 거예요.
거긴 건널 다리도 없고 판자대기도 없는데 말이죠.
그래서 신부는 시냇물 속을 걸어서 지나갈 생각으로 재빨리 자신의 옷들을 걷어 올렸어요.
그녀가 물속에 서 있지 마자, 예전 그 요술쟁이 남자가 나타나더니 그녀 바로 곁에서 조롱 섞인 고함을 지르는 거예요.
“아하! 눈이 삐었군, 여기 물이 어딨다는 거야?” 
그제야 그녀의 두 눈이 번쩍 떠지며 그녀 자신이 지금 푸른 ‘아마’(1미터까지 자라는 한해살이풀) 꽃들이 가득한 푸른 들판 한 복판에 옷들을 죄다 걷어 올리고서 서 있는 게 보였어요.
그때 사람들 모두도 그 광경을 보았고 조롱과 비웃음을 한가득 주며 그녀를 쫓아내버렸답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「닭장의 홰」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「닭장의 홰(나무 막대)」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter149.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



150. 거지 할머니



옛날에 할머니 한 분이 계셨어요, 여러분들도 다들 한 번씩은… 구걸을 하시는 할머니를 보셨겠지요?
이 여자도 마찬가지로 구걸을 하셨죠, 그러다 뭔가를 받게 되면 이렇게 말씀하셨어요.
“복 받으실 겁니다.”
이 거지 할머니가 문에 왔을 때 때마침 상냥한 개구쟁이 소년 한 명이 거기 옆에다 모닥불을 피워 놓고 몸을 데우고 있었어요.
소년이, 문가에서 떨며 서 있는 그 가련한 여성에게 친절하게도 이렇게 말해주었어요.
“할머니도 오셔서 좀 쬐세요.”
그녀가 불기운 속으로 들어오다 그만 너무 모닥불 가까이에 서는 바람에 그녀의 낡은 누더기 옷에 불이 붙기 시작했는데도 그녀는 알지 못했답니다.
소년은 서 있다 그걸 다 봤는데요, 그럼 자신이 대신 그 화염을 꺼야 하잖아요.
그가 그걸 내버려둘 하등의 이유가 없잖아요?
물이 없다면, 몸속의 모든 물을 눈물을 흘리고서라도 빼내었어야 하잖아요, 그럼 예쁜 두 물줄기가 나와 그 불을 껐으련만.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「거지 할머니」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「거지 할머니」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter150.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



151. 게으름뱅이 세 아들



세 아들을 둔 어떤 왕이 계셨어요. 
왕은 세 아들을 똑같이 사랑했기에 자신이 죽은 다음 정말 어느 아들에게 다음 왕위를 물려주어야할지 몰랐죠.
때가 되어 그가 막 죽으려는 찰나에, 그는 아들들을 침대 맡으로 불러 말했어요.
“얘들아, 내가 곰곰이 생각해봤는데 이 방법이 좋을 거 같더구나, 너희들 중 가장 게으른 아이에게 이 왕국을 물려주려한다.”
첫째가 말했어요.
“아빠, 그럼 왕국은 제 거예요, 왜냐면 저는 자려고 한 번 드러누우면 눈에 빗방울이 한 방울 떨어져도 자면 잤지 절대 눈을 뜨지 않을 만큼 게으르거든요.” 
둘째가 말했어요.
“아빠, 왕국은 제 소유입니다. 왜냐면 저는 모닥불에 몸을 녹이려 한 번 앉으면 제 발 뒤꿈치가 불에 타도 귀찮아서 다리를 오므리지 않을 만큼 게으르거든요.”
셋째인 막내가 말했어요.
“아빠, 왕국은 제 거예요. 왜냐면 저는, 누가 저를 교수형을 처하려고 목에 이미 새끼줄을 두르고, 날카로운 칼을 제 손에 쥐어주며 그 새끼줄을 끊어라 해도, 차라리 목이 매달리면 매달렸지 귀찮아서 제 손으로 새끼줄을 끊지 않을 정도로 게으르거든요.” 
이 말을 들은 아빠가 말했어요.
“네가 가장 심하니, 왕으로 삼겠노라.”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「게으름뱅이 세 아들」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「게으름뱅이 세 아들」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter151.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



152. 게으른 열두 하인



하루 종일 손도 까딱하지 않으려는 열두 하인들이 하루는 잔디밭에 누워 자신들의 게으름을 뽐내고 있었어요.
첫 번째 하인이 말했어요.
“너희들의 게으름은 나에 비하면 새 발의 피야, 한 번 들어볼래? 내 몸에 신경 쓰는 게 내 주요한 일이지. 난 조금밖에 안 먹고 훨씬 더 조금만 마시지. 그러면서도 하루에 네 끼 식사를 하고. 그러곤 배고플 때까지 굶지. 이 생활이 내겐 딱이야. 난 해가 꼭…대기에 뜰 때까지 침대에서 일어나지 않아. 낮 12시쯤 되면 난 이미 누울 자리를 살펴보고 있지. 주인이 부르기라도 하면, 못 들은 척 한단다, 그래도 또 부르면, 잠시 뜸을 들인 다음 일어나, 느릿느릿 그에게 걸어가지. 이렇게 생활했더니 견딜만한 거 있지.”
두 번째 하인이 말했어요.
“난 말을 돌보는 일을 하는데, 그냥 말 입에 음식 조금 넣어두고 아무 것도 안 한단다, 때론 아무 것도 안 주지. 주인이 물어보면 그냥 말에게 이미 먹이를 주었다 말하지. 그러곤 ‘귀리’(벼와 비슷하게 생김. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/MmMQSJ ) 상자 속에 누워 네 시간 동안 퍼질러 자지. 이후 한쪽 다리를 뻗어 두세 번 말의 몸을 발로 문질러 주면 그날 빗질이며 청소도 땡이야. 이런 좋은 일자리를 어디서 찾겠어? 그런데도 난 이 일이 지겨워죽겠어.”
세 번째 하인이 말했어요.
“왜 노동을 해야 하는 건데? 어림 반 푼어치 없는 소리지! 난 그냥 햇볕 들면 누워 자. 그러다 비라도 오면, 내가 왜 일어냐 나고? 비 다 맞고 있으면 돼지. 그러다 한 번은 어찌나 세차게 소나기가 오든지 점점 심해져 내 머리통에서 머리카락이 다 벗겨져 떠내려가지 뭐야. 머리에 이따만 한 두멍도 났었다니까. 그래도 난 그냥 그 위에 반창고 하나 바르고 말았어. 그런 종류의 상처가 몇 군데 더 있을 정도란다.”
네 번째 하인이 말했어요.
“조금이라도 일을 해야 할 게 생기면, 난 먼저 한 시간 동안 빈둥거려서 힘을 축척해. 그런 다음 아주 느리게 시작하지, 그러면서도 누가 나를 도울 사람 없다 찾아보지. 그럼 그에게 일의 주도권을 넘기고 난 그냥 지켜보는 거지. 이 방법으로 참 많이도 놀았지.”
다섯 번째 하인이 말했어요.
“그게 뭐 대수라고? 생각해봐, 난 ‘마구간’(말을 키우는 곳)에서 똥거름을 퍼 달구지에 담아야할 때도 그냥은 안 해. 느리게 한 사발 떠 ‘갈퀴’(포크)에 적당히 걸쳐 반만 들어 올려 한 15분 동안 휴식을 취한 다음 그제야 던져놓지. 그럼 하루에 한 수레만 쳐도 시간이 남아도는데. 누가 내가 놀고 있다 상상이나 하겠어.”
여섯 번째 하인이 말했어요.
“부끄러운 줄들 알아야지. 일을 왜 해. 난 세 주 내내 드러누웠던 적도 있는 걸. 옷도 한 번 벗지 않고 말이야. 신발 버클을 왜 해? 발이야 벗겨지던 말든 신경 안 써. 계단 오를 때도 첫 게단 밟은 다음 한 참 있다 또 한 발작 올리지. 그리곤 또 어디서 쉴지 한참을 뜸 들인단다.”
일곱 번째 하인이 말했어요.
“그래봤자 내겐 상대도 안 돼. 주인이 일을 맡기고 외출이라도 하면 난 신경 하나도 안 쓰고 자빠져 자. 누가 날 움직이려면 힘센 장사 네 명이 있는 힘껏 뒤에서 밀어도 될까 말깔 걸. 내가 한 번은 여섯 명이 다닥다닥 붙어서 누워 자는 곳에 갔다 나도 벌러덩 자빠져 잤는데 말이야. 내가 꿈쩍도 안하고 안 깨는 바람에 그들이 집에 가고 싶어 나를 ‘이고’(들고) 와야 했지.”
여덟 번째 하인이 말했어요.
“나에 비하면 자네들은 활동적인 거야. 난 내 앞에 돌부리가 놓여 있어도 내 발을 더 들어 올려 피하지 않아. 난 그냥 땅바닥에 드러눕는 다고. 그러다 진흙과 오물이 나를 젖게 하던 덥게 하던 신경 안 쓰. 햇볕이 나를 바짝 말릴 때까지 누워 있음 되는데 내가 왜 움직여. 기껏해야 어쩌다 한 번 반대쪽으로도 햇볕이 들게 돌아눕는 게 다라네.”
아홉 번째 하인이 말했어요.
“말 같지도 않은 소리들! 오늘 빵이 내 앞에 놓였을 때, 난 너무도 귀찮아서 먹지도 않았다네. 난 그냥 밥 먹기도 귀찮아서 졸졸 굶고 다녀! 물 항아리가 놓여 있음, 아니 내가 그 귀찮은 걸 왜 들어. 차라리 목이 말라 죽으면 또 몰라. 돌아 누워 자는 것도 내겐 사치야, 난 한 번 누우면 종일 그 자세 그대로라네.”
열 번째 하인이 말했어요.
“내가 얼마나 게으른가 하면 사고로 다리가 부러지고 종아리가 퉁퉁 부은 적이 있을 정도라네. 우리 셋이 도로가에 누워 있을 때 난 다리를 쭉 펴고 있었지. 그때 누군가가 마차를 몰고 오지 않겠나, 난 그 수레바퀴가 내 위를 자나가던 말던 내버려 뒀어. 내가 귀찮게 다리를 왜 빼, 하지만 마차 오는 소릴 못 들은 건 맞아, 왜냐면 작은 곤충들이 내 귀 주변을 윙윙 거리며, 내 코로 기어 들어와선 내 입을 통해 다시 나가는 바람에 못 듣기도 했거니와, 해충 그까짓 것 뭐 귀찮게 쫓을 게 뭐 있겠나?”
열한 번째 하인이 말했어요.
“난 어제 내 일자리를 관 뒀어. 무거운 책들을 들고서 주인한테 가져다주었다가 도로 갖다놓는 건데 뭔 놈의 일이 끝이 나야 말이지. 하지만 사실 대로 말하면 그가 나를 해고했지 더는 하지 말래나, 왜냐면 자기 옷들을 내가 먼지에 그대로 둬서 ‘좀이 먹었다나’(낡았다나) 뭐래나. 그래서 내가 기쁘게 관 뒀지.”
열두 번째 하인이 말했어요.
“오늘 내가 마차를 몰고 시골길을 달려야했는데 말이야, 난 그냥 마차 위에 짚 올려놓고 침대 삼아 쿨쿨 잤다네. 그 바람에 내 손에서 고삐(=끝)가 흘려내려, 내가 깨었을 땐, 말은 달아나버리고, 말을 ‘채’(마차의 테두리부분)에 묶고 있던 띠도 사라지고, 목에 대는 마구며, 굴레(=고삐)며 죄다 사라지고 없지 뭔가. 누가 지나가다 들고 튀었나봐. 이 외에도 마차가 ‘진구렁’(진흙 구덩이)에 빠져 꼼짝달싹 못하고 있더군. 그래도 뭐 난 그것들 다 그냥 그대로 두고 도로 짚을 펴고 자빠져 잤다네. 마침내 주인이 직접 오더니 마차를 끄집어내더군. 허허참, 그냥 거기 계속 자빠져 자고 있었음 참 꿀잠 잘 수 있었던 건데 말이야.”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「게으른 열두 하인」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「게으른 열두 하인」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter152.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



153. 양치기 소년



옛날에 모든 질문들에 현명한 대답을 하는 것으로 온 사방에 명성을 떨친 양치기 소년이 한 명 있었어요.
그 나라의 왕도 이 소문을 듣고는 쉽게 믿기지가 않아 사람을 보내 그 소년을 오게 했어요.
그런 다음 왕이 소년에게 말했어요.
“지금부터 내가 하는 세 가지 질문들에 네가 답을 할 수 있다면 내 너를 내 친자식처럼 여기고 이 곳 궁에서 함께 살도록 해주마.”
소년이 말했지요.
“그 세 가지 질문이 무엇이옵니까?”
왕이 말했어요.
“우선, 저기 바다에는 얼마나 많은 물방울들이 있느냐?”
양치기 소년이 대답했어요.
“왕이시어, 당신이 바다로 향하는 모든 강줄기들을 막아주셔서 제가 그 개수를 헤아릴 때까지 단 한 방울의 물방울도 바다로 흘러들지 않는다면 그럼 저는 당신에게 바다에 얼마나 많은 개수의 물방울들이 있는지를 말씀드릴 수 있습니다.”
왕이 말했어요.
“다음 질문은, 저 하늘 위엔 얼마나 많은 개수의 별들이 있느냐?”
양치기 소년이 말했어요.
“제게 큼직한 흰색 종이를 한 장만 주옵소서.”
그런 다음 소년은 그 종이 위에 펜으로 정말 보이지도 않을 만큼 작은 점들을 무수히 많이 찍었어요. 너무도 많아 세릴 수가 없을 정도였지요. 세기는커녕 쳐다만 봐도 눈이 아찔해질 정도로 점이 많고 작았으니까요.
그때 소년이 말했어요.
“저 하늘 위에는 이 종이에 찍힌 점들만큼이나 많은 별들이 있사옵니다. 자 세려 보시옵소서.”
하지만 아무도 세릴 수가 없었답니다.
왕이 말했어요.
“세 번째 질문은, 영원이 몇 초이냐이다.”
그러자 양치기 소년이 말했어요.
“포어포메른(독일 북쪽. 독일과 폴란드 사이) 저지대(해안가)에 다이아몬드 산이 있습니다. 그 산의 높이는 4킬로미터이고, 너비도 4킬로미터, 깊이도 4킬로미터입니다. 백년마다 한 번씩 작은 새가 날아와 자신의 부리(주둥이)로 그 산 위를 쪼고 간답니다. 바로 그 산이 그 작은 새에 의해 완전히 닳아 없어질 때가, 영원의 시간으로 1초가 지난 것입니다.”
왕이 말했어요.
“너는 현인처럼 세 가지 질문들에 대답해주었다. 이제부터는 내 너를 궁에서 살게 해주고, 내 친자식처럼 여기겠노라.”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「양치기 소년」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「양치기 소년」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter153.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



154. 은화가 된 별



옛날에 아빠 엄마를 잃은 어린 소녀가 하나 있었지요.
그녀는 너무도 가난하여 묵을 방도 잘 침대도 없었고, 가진 거라곤 단지 입고 있는 옷과, 어떤 자애로운 분이 먹으라고 주신 단지 약간의 빵을 손에 쥐고 있는 게 다였지요.
하지만 그녀는 착하고 신앙심이 깊었어요.
이렇듯 세상에 내버려진 그녀는 선하신 하느님만 의지하고서 들판으로 나아갔답니다.
그때 가난한 남자와 마주치게 되었어요. 
그가 말했어요.
“아, 먹을 걸 좀 줘, 나 너무 배가 고파!”
그녀가 그에게 자신이 가진 약간의 빵을 전부 내밀며 말했지요.
“하느님의 가호가 있기를.”
 그녀가 다시 나아갔어요.
그러자 신음하는 아이가 하나 다가오더니 말했어요.
“머리가 너무 추워요, 제게 덮을 걸 좀 주세요.”
그래서 그녀가 자신의 머리씌우개를 벗어 그에게 주었어요.
그녀가 좀 더 걸어가니 또 다른 아기가 웃옷도 입지 않은 채 추위에 벌벌 떨고 있었지요.
그래서 그녀가 자신의 웃옷을 아이에게 주었어요.
그리고 좀 더 걸어가니 한 아이가 덧옷(드레스)을 구걸했어요. 그래서 그녀가 자신의 덧옷을 아이에게 주었어요.
결국 그녀가 어느 숲에 도착했을 때는 날이 이미 저문 뒤라 어두웠지요.
그럼에도 또 다른 아이가 다가오더니 속옷마저 달라 청했어요.
착하고 어린 소녀는 속으로 생각했지요.
‘날은 이미 저물어 밤인걸, 나를 볼 사람은 없어, 그러니 내 속옷을 줘도 될 거야.’
그리곤 옷을 벗어 그 아이에게 주었어요.
그녀가 그렇게 자기 외에 아무도 없는 곳에서 서 있는데, 갑자기 하늘의 별들이 우수수 떨어지는데, 그건 다름 아닌 반질반질 은화들이었어요.
또한 그녀가 자신의 속옷을 이미 벗어주었음에도, 그녀는 고급 재료로 만든 새 속옷을 입고 있었지요.
그녀는 이리하여 은화들을 모을 수 있었고, 남은 생을 모두 부유하게 살았답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「은화가 된 별」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「은화가 된 별」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter154.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



155. 숨겨놓은 동전



아빠가 하루는 점심을 들러 아내와 아이들과 그리고 이 집을 방문한 착한 친구(아빠친구)와 함께 식탁에 앉아 있었습니다.
그들이 그렇게 앉아 있는 동안 시계가 12시를 가리키며 울렸습니다. 
그때 손님의 눈에 문이 열리며 아주 창백하게 생긴 아이가 눈같이 흰 옷을 입고 들어오는 것이 보였습니다. 
그 아이는 주변을 둘러보지도 그렇다고 말을 하지도 않고 곧장 옆방으로 들어갔습니다.
잠시 후 그 아이가 나왔는데 들어갈 때와 똑같이 아주 조용히 문을 나섰습니다.
둘째 날도 그리고 셋째 날에도, 똑같은 일이 벌어졌습니다.
마침내 손님이 아빠에게, “매일 정오(낮12시)때만 되면 옆방으로 들어가는 그 고운 아이가 누구냐?”고 물었습니다.
“아무도 아무것도 못 봤는데.”라며 아빠가 말했습니다.
그래서 누구 집 아이인지도 알 수 없었죠.
다음날 그 아이가 다시 나타나자, 손님이 손가락으로 가리키며 아빠가 “저 아이가 보이지 않아?”라고 물었습니다.
하지만 아빠와 엄마는 물론 아이들의 눈에도 아무 것도 보이지 않았죠.
이에 손님이 자리에서 일어나더니 방문으로가 살짝 열어 안을 엿보았습니다.
그러자 그의 눈에, 아이가 바닥에 앉아 바닥 ‘판자’(나뭇조각)들 사이에 갈라진 틈 사이를 열심히 살피며 손으로 파고 있는 게 보였어요.
하지만 손님을 본 그 아이는 홀연히 사라지고 말았죠.
손님은, 아이가 정확히 무엇을 하고 있었는지를 본 그대로 말해주었지요.
그러자 엄마가 깜짝 놀라며 말했어요.
“아, 그 애는 한 달 전에 죽은 제 사랑하는 아이에요.”
그들이 그 판자들을 들어 올려보니 죽은 아이가, “얘야, 가난한 사람들에게 주거라”라며 엄마에게서 예전에 받은 동전 두 개가 나왔어요.
하지만 아이는 생각했던 거지요.
‘이 돈이면 비스킷을 사먹을 수 있어.’
그래서 아무도 몰래 숨겨두려고 판자들 사이에 둔 거죠.
그 바람에 아이는 무덤에서도 한시도 평안하지 못하였답니다. 그래서 매일 정오(점심) 때면 이 동전들을 가지러 왔던 거지요.
부모님은 즉시 그 돈을 가난한 사람에게 주었어요.
그 후로 그 아이는 다시 나타나지 않았답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「숨겨놓은 동전」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「숨겨놓은 동전」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter155.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



156. 신붓감 고르기



옛날 옛적에, 너무도 결혼이 하고 싶은 젊은 양치기가 한 명 있었어요.
그런데 그가 알고 지내는 세 자매가 하나 같이 예뻐서 도대체 누구를 신붓감으로 골라야할지 모르겠는 거예요.
그래서 엄마에게 말씀드리고 조언을 구했지요.
엄마가 말했어요.
“세 명 모두 초대해보거라, 그런 다음 그녀들에게 치즈를 나눠주고 어떻게 먹는지를 살펴보거라.”
젊은이가 말씀대로 했어요.
하지만 첫 번째 아가씨는 껍질 채로 치즈를 꿀꺽 삼켜버렸고요, 두 번째 아가씨는 치즈에서 껍질을 서툴게 잘라냈는데 너무 서둘다 그만 상당량의 치즈도 껍질과 함께 도려내 버리고 말았지요.
세 번째 아가씨는 주의 깊게 껍질을 치즈에게 벗겨냈어요. 그건 정말이지 너무 과하지도 그렇다고 너무 적지도 않은 알맞은 자름이었어요.
양치기가 이 모두를 엄마께 말씀드렸어요.
그녀가 말했어요.
“세 번째 아가씨를 네 아내로 삼으려무나.”
그는 엄마 말대로 했고, 아내와 함께 만족하고 행복하게 살았데요.  
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「신붓감 고르기」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「신붓감 고르기」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter156.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



157. 아마 부스러기 (부지런한 하녀)



옛날에 예쁘지만 게으르고 부주의한 처녀가 한 명 살고 있었어요.
그녀는 실을 만들 때도 행여 아마에 얽힘이 약간이라도 있음 발끈해 아마를 몽땅 잡아 뽑아 바닥에 내버리고 말았지요. 그래서 그녀 옆엔 아마 부스러기들이 수북이 쌓였어요.
이때 그녀에겐 부지런한 하녀가 한 명 있었는데, 그녀가 버려진 아마 부스러기들을 한데 모아 씻은 다음 고운 실을 만들어 자신을 돋보일 수 있는 아름다운 가운(드레스)을 만들었답니다.
어떤 젊은이가 게으른 소녀에게 청혼을 해 결혼식이 거행되기로 예정되었지요.
결혼식 저녁 날, 부지런한 하녀가 자신이 만든 예쁜 드레스를 입고 흥겹게 춤을 추었어요.
그러자 신부가 말했지요…
“뭐하는 거지, 내가 버린 아마 부스러기들로 옷을 지어 입은 주제에 ‘날궂이’(괜한 짓)를 하고 있네.”
신랑이 그 소리를 듣곤 신부에게 “무슨 말이냐?”고 물었지요.
그래서 신부는, 하녀가 입고 있는 옷이 실은 자신이 버린 아마로 만든 드레스라 말해주었지요.
그 말을 들은 신랑은, 신부가 얼마 게으른지 알았고, 가련한 하녀가 얼마나 부지런한지 알았어요.
그래서 신랑은 신부를 단념하고 대신 그 하녀를 자신의 신부로 삼았답니다.

 
(동화 끝)

동화 「아마 부스러기 (부지런한 하녀)」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「아마 부스러기 (부지런한 하녀)」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter157.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



158. 아빠 참새와 새끼 참새 네 마리



네 마리 어린 참새들을 둔 아빠 참새 한 마리가 제비 둥지에서 살고 있었답니다.
그들이 갓 날아다닐 수 있게 되었을 때, 몇몇 깡패 소년들이 그 둥지를 뽑아버려, 그 바람에 모든 참새들이 강풍에 휩쓸려 뿔뿔이 흩어지고 말았어요.
자식들이 이런 식으로 세상에 나가게 된 게 늙은 참새는 무엇보다 슬펐어요. 세상의 수많은 위험들을 경고해주지도 못했는데, 그리고 세상을 헤쳐 나갈 방법들을 잘 알려주지도 못했는데 말이죠.
가을이 되어 엄청난 참새들이 밀밭으로 모였어요. 거기서 늙은 참새는 자신의 네 자식들을 다시 만나게 돼 기쁨가득 집으로 데리고 왔답니다.
“아, 내 사랑하는 아들들아, 그간 여름을 어찌 보냈더냐? 강풍에 그렇게 날려가 버려 내가 제대로 가르쳐주지도 보살펴주지도 못했는데. 작은 새들이 해쳐나가야 할 위험들이 얼마나 많더냐!” 
그래서 아빠 참새는 우선 첫째 참새에게 “여름을 어디서 보냈느냐? 먹고 살만하더냐?”라고 물어보았어요.
“저는 정원들에서 머물며, 유충(나비의 유충)들과 작은 벌레들을 잡아먹고 지냈죠. 버찌가 익을 때까지는 그렇게 지냈어요.”
“오, 내 아들아,”라며 아빠 참새가 말했어요. “한 입씩 먹는 건 나쁘지 않다. 다만 그러는 가운데도 위험은 도사리고 있는 법이니라. 이제부터는 항상 더 조심하는 걸 잊지 마라. 특히나 속이 비고 꼭대기에 작은 구멍이 있는 기다란 초록색 ‘장대’(긴 막대기)를 가지고 사람들이 정원을 이리저리 오갈 땐 특히 조심하거리.”
“네, 아빠, 왁스가 발린 구멍을 초록색 잎사귀로 감싼 그 장대 말씀하시는 거지요?”라며 아들이 말했어요.
“네가 그걸 어찌 아느냐?”
“상인 ‘네’(집) 정원에 있을 때 봤어요,”라며 새끼 참새가 말했어요. 
“오, 내 아들아, 상인이란 ‘족속’(사람)들은 특히나 약샥 빠른 자들이란다.”라며 아빠 참새가 말했어요.
“그런 사람들 틈에 있다 보면 네가 마치 약음(교활함)에 대해 충분히 배운 거 같지만 세상은 그런 게 아니란다, 자만하면 안 돼요.”
그 후 아빠 참새가 둘째에게 물었어요.
“너는 이번 여름을 어디서 보냈더냐?”
“궁전에서요.”라며 아들이 말했어요.
“그런 장소는 우리 참새들이나 분별없는 작은 새들에게 아무 짝에도 소용없다… 도처에 온통 금이요, ‘벨벳’(고운 털이 난 직물)이요, 비단이요, 갑옷과 투구요, 마구(말에게 씌우는 물건)며, 새매(독수리)며, 부엉이며, ‘잿빛개구리매’(유럽산 매)들 뿐이잖느냐. 사람들이 곡식을 까고 ‘탈곡’(이삭에서 낟알을 털어내는 거)을 하는 ‘말 우리’(달리는 말이 사는 집)에 머물며 매일 곡식을 조금씩 주어먹는 게 제격이니라.”
“네, 아빠.”라며 아들이 말했어요. “하지만 마구간에… 하인들이 밀짚으로 덫을 설치하고 매달아 놓으면 열에 아홉은 꼼짝없이 붙들리고 만다고요.”
“네가 그걸 어디서 본 게냐?”라며 늙은 새가 말했어요. 
“궁전 마구간에서 일하는… 하인들이요.”
“오, 내 아들아, 그런 몹쓸 놈들을 봤나! 하지만 넌 궁전의 군주들 사이를 날더라도 절대 깃털을 남겨선 안 되느니라, 세상을 헤쳐 나갈 많은 방법들을 배웠어야 하는데. 항상 위를 쳐다보고 그 너머를 보려고 노력하거라. 가장 현명한 개들도 가끔씩은 늑대들에게 잡아먹히기도 한단다.”
아빠는 셋째에게도 물어보셨어요.
“너는 어디서 안전을 도모하였더냐?”
“시골길이나 큰 길들에 있는 통(물통)이나 밧줄들을 파헤치면 이따금씩 곡식이나 보리가 한 알씩 나왔어요.”
“그 참 고상한 요리니라.”라며 아빠 참새가 말했어요. “하지만 주변 경계를 늦추지 말거라, 특히 누군가 허리를 숙이고 돌멩이를 줍는 거 같거든 지체 없이 도망치거라.”
“참말로 그래요.”라며 아들이 말했어요. “하지만 돌이나 광석 조각을 자기 가슴께나 호주머니 속에 숨기고 다니는 사람도 있던 걸요?”
“그건 또 어디서 본 게냐?”
“‘산지’(산이 있는 곳) 주민들 사이에서요, 아빠. 그들은 밖에 외출할 때면 대개 몸에 광석 쪼가리들을 품고 다녀요.”
“산지 주민들은 근면한 족속들이란다, 현명하기도 하지. 네가 그들과 더 머물다보면 보고 듣는 게 더 많은 게다. 하지만 명심해두거라, 수많은 우리 참새들이 산지 소년들에게 붙들려 생을 끝맺는다는 것을 말이다.”
아빠 참새는 드디어 막내아들에게 물었어요.
“넌, 짹짹거리는 젖먹이 새로 형제들 중 가장 여리고 약하지 않더냐. 넌 나와 살자구나. 세상은 구부러진 부리와 긴 발톱들을 가진 사납고 사악한 새들로 가득하단다, 그들은 숨어있다 너 같은 작은 새를 한 입에 꿀꺽하지. 네 본성에 충실하며 나뭇가지 사이나 집에서 작은 거미나 유충(나비의 유충)들을 쪼아 먹고 살면 그 또한 평화롭게 여생을 누리며 살 수 있느니라.”
“사랑하는 아버지, 그럼 누가 그를 먹여주고, 사람들로부터 보호해주었나요, 그리고 누가 새매와, 독수리와, 솔개들로부터 그를 아침저녁으로 합당한 음식을 양식하게 했나요. 신실한 하느님이십니다. 온 숲과 마을 새들의 창조자요 보호자시며, 아기 까마귀의 울음소리와 기도마저도 흘러듣지 않으시고, 어느 참새와 굴뚝새도 자신의 뜻이 아니고는 땅으로 떨어지게 하지 않으시는 분이시죠.”
“아니 넌 또 그걸 어디서 배운 게냐?”
아들(막내)이 대답했어요.
“강풍에 날려 저는 어느 교회로 날아가게 되었지요, 거기서 여름을 창문에 붙은 파리와 거미들을 쪼아 먹으며 지내다 설교 소리를 듣게 된 거예요. 그렇게 모든 참새들의 아버지께서 저를 여름 내내 보살펴주시고 먹여주시오, 저는 사나운 새들로부터도 무사할 수 있었고 큰 위해를 당하지 않은 겁니다.”
“진실로, 네가 내 아들이다. 교회를 안식처를 정해 거미와 윙윙대는 파리들을 청소해주고, 어린 까마귀처럼 하느님께 귀의하게 되었구나, 너는 모든 일이 잘 될 것이며, 평생을 온전히 사나운 새들로부터도 보호받으리라.”
“하느님께 나아가는 자, 침묵 속에서 고통 받으며 기다리고 기도하는 자, 신앙과 양심을 순수하게 지키는 자, 진실로 하느님의 보호를 받으리라.”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「아빠 참새와 새끼 참새 네 마리」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「아빠 참새와 새끼 참새 네 마리」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter158.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



159. 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅(약속의 땅 가나안)에 관한 이야기



젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅에 저는 간 적이 있습니다. 로마와 ‘라테란궁’(중세 교황의 궁전, 지금은 박물관)이 작은 비단 실 하나에 매달려 있을 때지요.
거기선 발이 없는 사나이가 제일 빠른 말보다 더 빨리 달렸고, 예리하고 날카로운 칼로 다리 하는 그냥 싹둑 벨 수 있었지요.
휙휙 달리는 산토끼들을 쫓는 은빛 코를 지닌 어린 당나귀도 보았고요, 가지에 핫케이크가 자라는 거대한 라임 나무도 보았지요.
저는 보았습니다. 거기선 야위고 늙은 염소 한 마리가 자기 몸무게만큼 짐을 가득 실은 수레 100대와 소금 마차 60대를 거뜬히 끌고 가는 것을요.
제 말이 거짓말 같다고요?
저는 심지어 말이나 소도 없이 쟁기 혼자서 밭 일을 하고 있는 것도 본 걸요. 그리고 한 살짜리 갓난아기가 맷돌 네 개를 ‘레겐스부르크’(독일 남부 도시이름)에서 ‘트리어’(독일 서부 도시이름)까지 던졌다, 다시 ‘트리어’(독일 서부)에서 ‘스트라스부르’(프랑스와 독일 국경에 딱 붙어있는, 프랑스의 도시이름)까지 던지는 것을요.
그리고 라인 강을 거뜬히 헤엄쳐(‘나는 것’이 아니라 ‘헤엄쳐’임) 건너는 매도 보았지요, 그땐 이게 당연했습니다.
몇몇 물고기들이 서로 서로 소동을 벌이기 시작하는 바람에 그 소리가 천국에까지 가 닿는 것도 저는 들었고요, 높은 산꼭대기에 있는 깊고 깊은 골짜기에서 달콤한 꿀이 물처럼 흐르는 것도 저는 보았답니다. 참 특이했지요.
풀밭에서 베개를 베고 누워 자는 까마귀 두 마리도 보았고요, 모기 두 마리가 ‘다리’(강을 건너는 다리)를 건설하고 있는 것도 저는 보았습니다. 두 비둘기가 늑대 한 마리를 갈기갈기 찢는 것도 보았고요, 두 어린아이가 두 아기를 낳는 모습도 보았지요. 그리고 두 개구리가 함께 곡식을 도리깨질(타작)하는 것도 보았고요.
저는 보았습니다. 거기서 두 생쥐가 주교(교회의 주교)님을 임명하고 있는 광경을요, 그리고 두 고양이가 곰(동물인 곰)의 혀를 긁는 것을요.
그런 다음 (달팽이가 스스로) 뛰어올라 사나운 두 사자를 한 손으로 때려잡던 달팽이도 저는 보았고요, 이발사가 서서 여성의 턱수염을 면도해주는 것도 보았고요, 두 젖먹이 아이가 자기 엄마보고 입 좀 다무시라고 말하는 소리도 저는 똑똑히 들었답니다.
저는 보았습니다. 기기 두 그레이하운드(사냥개)가 강물에서 맷돌을 끄집어내는 것을 매우 유감스럽게 지켜보던 나이 든 말을요. 그래도 그(말)는 그게 옳다 말하더군요.
온힘을 다해 마당에서 곡식을 도리깨질(타작)하며 서 있던 네 마리 말들도 보았고, 난로에 몸을 데우고 있던 두 염소도 보았고, 빵을 구우러 솥(오븐)에 집어넣던 붉은 암소도 보았지요.
그때 수탉 한 마리가 울더군요, 꼬끼-오-꼬꼬-오!  
이 이야기는 이게 다입니다. 그럼 우리 모두 한 번 외쳐볼까요, - 꼬끼-오-꼬꼬-오!
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅에 관한 이야기」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅에 관한 이야기」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter159.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



160. 디트마르쉬의 허풍



이야기 하나 해드릴게요. 통닭(구운 닭) 두 마리가 날아가는 걸 보았거든요. 어찌나 빨리들 날아가는지, 가슴을 하늘로 향하고, 등은 지옥으로 향하고 날아가던 걸요. 
그리고 ‘모루’(해머질 할 때 밑에 받치는, 대장간의 쇠 받침대)와 맷돌이… 라인 강(유럽의 강)을 귀엽고 느리게 그러면서도 우아하게 헤엄쳐 건너갔어요.
‘성령 강림절 축제 기간’(부활절 후 50일 되는 날)에 얼음 위에 앉아 있던 개구리 한 마리가 ‘쟁기’(농기구)의 날을 먹어버렸어요.
산토끼 한 마리를 잡으려던 ‘세’(3) 친구가 ‘목발’(지팡이)과 ‘죽마’(말 타기 놀이 할 때 타고 두 발로 끌며 다니는 거)를 타고 갔지요. 그 중 한 명은 귀머거리였고, 두 번째 사람은 장님, 세 번째 사람은 벙어리, ‘네’(4) 번째 사람은 한 발짝도 못 떼는 사람이었죠.
그럼 누가 산토끼를 잡았게요?
우선, 장님이 들판을 가로지르며 달리는 산토끼를 발견했고요, 벙어리가 절름발이에게 소리쳐 알렸고요, 절름발이가 산토끼의 목덜미를 움켜잡아 잡았지요.
돛(배의 돛)을 달고 육지를 항해하길 바라는 어떤 남자들이 있었는데, 바람 부는 방향으로 돛을 죄다 펼치더니 드넓은 들판들을 가르며 항해해나갔답니다. 그러다 높은 산을 하나 넘다 그만 모두 끔찍스럽게도 물에 빠져 죽고 말았답니다.
‘게’(바닷가에서 옆으로 기어 다니는 게) 한 마리가, 전속력으로 달아나고 있는 산토끼 한 마리를 쫓고 있었지요. 
지붕 위로 높이 뛰어오른 젖소 한 마리가 거기가 제 집인 양 누워 자네요.
그 ‘지역’(디트마르쉬=독일 북쪽의 군)의 파리들은 이곳의 염소만큼이나 커요.
창문을 열어보세요, 거짓말들이 방실거리며 날아가고 있을 테니까요.(ㅋㅋㅋ)
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「디트마르쉬의 허풍」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「디트마르쉬의 허풍」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter160.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



161. 수수께끼 이야기



세 여인이 들판에서 자라는 꽃들로 변했지요.
하지만 그들 중 한 여인에게는 밤에 자기 집에서 보낼 수 있는 특권이 허락되었지요.
동틀 무렵이 되면 그녀는 들판의 동무들 곁으로 되돌아와 다시 한 송이 꽃이 되었답니다.
하루는 그녀가 자기 남편에게 말했어요.
“오늘 오후에 오셔서 저를 따 주세요, 그럼 저는 마법에서 풀려나 당신과 쭉 함께 지낼 수 있을 거예요.”
남편이 그 말대로 했어요.
자 이제부터 질문, 그럼 그녀의 남편은 어떻게 다 똑같은 꽃송이들 중에서 그녀를 다른 꽃들과 구별해낼 수 있었을까요? 맞춰보세요.
(모두, 원문에 있는 문장들임→) 정답 : 그녀는 그날 밤 동안 들판이 아닌 집에 있었기에, 그녀 위로 어떤 이슬방울도 맺히지 않았던 거지요. 그 반면 들판에서 밤을 지낸 다른 꽃들 위엔 방울방울 이슬이 맺혀있었던 거죠. 이 방법으로 남편은 그녀를 구별할 수 있었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「수수께끼 이야기」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「수수께끼 이야기」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter161.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



162. 흰눈이와 빨간 장미



외딴 오두막에 사는 어느 가난한 과부가 옛날에 한 명 있었답니다.
오두막 앞마당엔 두 그루의 장미 나무가 자라고 있었는데, 하는 흰 장미들이 피는 나무였고, 또 하나는 빨간 장미들이 피는 나무였지요.
그녀에겐 또한 그 두 그루 장미나무를 닮은 딸이 둘 있었답니다. 하나는 ‘흰눈’이라 불리는 아이였고, 또 한 아이는 ‘빨간 장미’라 불리는 아이었지요.
그 애들은 세상의 어느 아이들처럼 해맑고 착하고 분주하고 기분이 상쾌한 아이들이었어요.
특히 ‘힌눈’이는 ‘빨간 장비’보다 더 차분하고 온화했지요, 반면 빨간 장미는 풀밭이나 들판을 뛰어다니며 나비를 쫓아다니거나 꽃을 따기를 더 좋아했지요.
하지만 흰눈이는 엄마와 집에 앉아 집안일을 돕는 걸 더 좋아라했어요, 할 일이 없을 땐 엄마에게 책을 읽어주곤 하면서 보냈지요.
두 딸들은 서로를 아주 좋아해 언제나 손을 꼭 잡고 다닐 정도였어요.
흰눈이가 “우리 절대 헤어지지 말자,”라고 말하면, 빨간장미가 “그래 하늘만큼 땅만큼 절대로,”라고 대답했지요, 그럼 엄마가 “서로 언제나 나눠가지렴.”라고 덧붙여주었지요.
아이들은 둘만 따로 숲을 돌아다니며 산딸기(원문→‘레드 베리즈’)를 따 모았답니다.
그래도 어떤 짐승들도 그들을 해코지하지 않았죠, 그냥 그 애들을 신뢰해 가까이 다가오기까지 한 걸요. 
귀여운 산토끼가 그 애들이 손에 담아주는 양배추 이파리들을 먹곤 했고요, 노루가 그들 바로 곁에서 풀을 뜯었고요, 수사슴이 폴짝폴짝 그들 옆에서 뛰어다니곤 했지요. 그리고 나뭇가지들 위에 앉은 새들이 자신들(새들)이 아는 노래는 뭐든 불려주곤 했답니다.
그러니 불운이 그들을 덮칠 틈이 없었죠.
그래도 가끔씩 너무 늦게까지 숲에 머물다 어둠이 깔릴 때면 그 애들은 이끼 위에 나란히 누워 아침이 밝아올 때까지 잠을 잤더랬죠, 엄마도 그걸 잘 알았기에 걱정하지 않았답니다.
한번은 그들이 숲에서 밤을 보내고 동이 텄을 때 깨어나 보니, 그들 곁에 빛나는 흰 옷을 입은 한 아름다운 아이(남자)가 보이지 뭐예요.
그가 일어나더니 그녀들을 아주 상냥하게 바라보며 아무 말 없이 숲으로 사라져버렸답니다.
그녀들이 주변을 둘러보니 그녀들이 잠이 들었던 곳 바로 가까이가 바로 절벽이었던 거예요, 하마터면 어둠 속에서 몇 발자국만 더 걸었더라도 낭떠러지에 떨어졌을 뻔했던 거지요.
엄마가 그녀들에게 말했어요.
“그건 아마도 착한 아이를 지켜주는 천사님이셨던 모양이구나.”
흰눈이와 빨간 장미는 엄마의 예쁜 오두막집을 깔끔하게 했기에, 안을 들여다보는 건 늘 기쁨이었답니다.
여름이면 빨간 장미가 집을 정리정돈 했는데, 매일 아침 엄마가 일어나시기 전 침대 맡에 꽃 화환을 올려다놓았지요, 장미나무에서 따온 장미 하나씩이 달린 화환이었죠.
겨울이면 흰눈이가 난로에 불을 피우고 솥을 올려놓았지요. 구리로 만든 그 솥을 흰눈이가 어찌나 닦고 또 닦았는지 금처럼 반짝반짝 빛이 났답니다.
저녁에 눈송이가 내리자 엄마가 말했어요.
“얘, 흰눈아, 문을 잠그거라.”
그런 다음 그들은 난로 주위에 앉았어요. 엄마가 안경을 끼시더니 커다란 책을 하나 꺼내 읽어주시면 두 소녀들은 그 옆에서 실을 만들며 열심히 들었지요.
그들 가까이에 어린 양 한 마리도 바닥에 드러누워 있었고요, 그들 뒤에 있던 횃대(새가 밟고 앉는 나무막대기)에 흰 비둘기 한 마리가 앉아선 날개 밑에 고개를 푹 처박고 있었지요.
그러던 어느 날 저녁 한 번은, 모두가 그렇게 편안히 모여 앉아 있는데, 문 쪽에서 누군가가 마치 들어오길 원하는 듯 “퉁퉁!” 문을 쳐댔어요.
엄마가 말했지요.
“어서, 빨간 장미야, 문을 열어봐라, 안식처를 찾는 나그네일 게다.”
빨간 장미는 그게 불쌍한 남자일 거라 생각하고 가 문을 열었는데, 사람이 아니라 펑퍼짐한 검은 머리가 문 안쪽으로 쑥하고 들어오지 뭐예요.
빨간 장미가 비명을 지르며 뒤로 도망쳤고요, 어린 양은 “매애!”하고 울었고요, 비둘기는 푸드득거렸고요, 흰눈이는 엄마 침대 뒤로 숨었어요.
하지만 그 곰은 이렇게 말하기 시작했어요.
“해칠 생각은 없습니다, 누구도 해치지 않을 거예요! 밖이 너무 추워 몸이 반쯤 얼어 당신들 곁에서 몸 좀 녹이고 싶을 뿐입니다.”
“가엾은 곰아,”라며 엄마가 말했어요. “불 가로 와 누우렴, 너무 가까이 가 네 털에 불이 옮겨붙지 않게 조심하구.”
그런 다음 그녀가 소리쳤어요.
“흰눈아, 빨간 장미야, 나오렴, 곰은 너희들을 해치지 않을 거래, 이젠 안전하단다.”
그래서 그들이 나왔지요, 뒤이어 어린 양과 비둘기고 가까이 다나왔답니다. 이젠 곰이 무섭지 않았거든요.
곰이 말했어요.
“얘들아, 와서, 내 털에 붙은 눈 좀 털어주겠니.”
그래서 그들이 빗자루를 자여와 곰의 털을 말끔히 털어주었어요.
곰은 불가 옆에 몸을 쭉 뻗고 누워서는 만족하고 포근한지 드르렁거렸지요.
머지않아 분위기가 포근해지자, 아이들이 이 서툰 손님을 가지고 장난을 치기 시작했어요.
그들은 곰의 머리카락을 두 손으로 세게 잡아당기고, 자신들의 발을 곰의 등에다 대고 막 두드렸지요. 아니면 개암나무 회초리로 곰을 막 때렸어요, 그러다 곰이 으르렁거리면 그들은 웃음을 터뜨렸지요.
하지만 곰도 그 놀이에 한 일원으로써 참여했답니다. 다만 아이들의 장난질이 좀 심하다 싶을 땐 이렇게 으름장을 놓았죠.
“나 좀 살려줘라, 얘들아, 꼭 그렇게 너희들의 연인을 죽여야 쓰겠니, 흰눈아, 빨간 장미야?”
잠잘 시간이 되자 모두들 침대로 갔지요.
엄마가 곰에게 말했어요.
“곰은 난로 옆에 자렴, 거기라면 추위와 나쁜 날씨로부터 안전하단다.”
곧 동이 트자 아이들은 곰을 보내주었어요, 곰이 눈을 헤치며 숲 속으로 성큼성큼 걸어가버렸거든요.
이후 그 곰은 저녁마다 동일한 시간에 와 난로 옆에 드러누웠답니다. 그리고 아이들이 좋을 대로 장난을 치게 내버려두었지요. 그래서 아이들은 곰에게 너무도 익숙해져서 이 검은 친구가 도착하기 전까진 절대 문을 잠그지 않는 버릇이 생겼답니다.
봄이 되어 만물이 쏟아나자, 곰이 하루는 아침에 흰눈에게 말했어요.
“난 이제 가봐야 해, 여름동안은 돌아올 수 없을 거야.”
“왜, 어디 가는데, 귀여운 곰아?”라며 흰눈이 말했어요.
“숲에 가야해, 가서 사악한 난쟁이들로부터 내 보물들을 지켜야한단다. 땅이 꽁꽁 언 겨울엔 그들이 지하에 머무니 나올 일이 없는데, 하지만 지금 같이 눈서리와 땅이 녹은 때엔, 난쟁이들이 땅을 헤집고 나와 그동안 내가 모아놓은 보물들을 훔쳐간단다. 일단 난쟁이들이 자기들의 동굴 속으로 가져간 것들은 쉽게 다시 되찾기가 너무도 어려워서 그래.”
곰이 그렇게 가버리려 하자 흰눈이는 아주 슬펐어요. 그래서 그를 위해 망설이며 문을 열어주었더니, 곰이 나가다 그만 털 한 움큼이 찢어지고 말았답니다. 그런데 그게 흰눈이 눈엔 꼭 반짝이는 황금으로 보였더랬죠. 하지만 휜눈이도 확실했던 건 아니예요.
곰은 그렇게 서둘러 나가더니 곧 나무들 뒤로 모습을 감추고 말았답니다.
잠시 후 엄마가 두 딸을 숲으로 보내 나무를 주워오게 했어요, 땔나무요.
그들이 땅바닥에 누워 있는 큰 나무를 발견했는데, 나무줄기 바로 옆에서 뭔가가 잔디 앞뒤로 폴짝폴짝 뛰고 있지 뭐예요. 그들로선 그게 뭔지 감도 잡을 수 없었죠.
그들이 좀 더 다가가보니 그건 쭈글쭈글 주름이 진 얼굴을 하고서 눈송이처럼 하얀 수염을 1미터까지 늘어뜨리고 있던 난쟁이이지 뭐예요.
그러니까 그의 수염 끝 한쪽이 나무의 갈라진 틈에 꼭 끼여 이 작은 친구가 끈에 묶인 강아지 마냥 앞뒤로 폴짝거리고 있었던 거예요, 어찌할 줄을 모르고서 말이죠.
난쟁이가 시뻘건 눈을 하고서 소녀들을 노려보다 소리쳤어요.
“뭘 보고 섰는 거야? 와서 도와야할 거 아냐?”
“거기서 뭐하시는데요, 난장이 아저씨?”라며 빨간 장미가 물었어요.
“보면 몰라, 이 바보 멍청이들아!”라며 난쟁이가 대답했어요. “요리에 쓸 땔감을 구하러 이 나무를 찢어가려던 거다. 우리 난쟁이들은 음식 하나도 곧잘 두꺼운 나무에 구워 먹으니까. 너희 탐욕스런 인간들처럼 거친 음식은 삼키지 못해. 그래서 안전하게 이 나무속에 쐐기(뾰족한 나뭇조각) 박고 모든 게 생각대로 되려던 찰나에, 이 망할 놈의 나무가 너무 부드러워 쐐기가 도로 튀어나오는 바람에, 나무가 너무도 갑자기 오므라들어 내 이 아름다운 흰색 수염이 끼었지 뭐니. 너무 꼭 끼는 바람에 꼼짝달싹 못하고 있다, 이 어리석고 번지르르하고 우유빛깔 얼굴들을 한 것이 지금 웃음이 나와! 응! 요런 얄미운 것들이 있나!”  
아이들이 힘을 써보았어요, 하지만 수염을 뽑을 수가 없었죠. 너무 꼭 끼어 있었거든요.
“내가 가서 누구라도 불러올게.”라며 빨간 장미가 말했어요.
“이 센스 없는 멍청아!”라며 그 난쟁이이가 발끈해하며 말했어요. “누굴 왜 불러오려고? 너희 힘은 뒀다 뭐하게, 뭐라도 좀 더 나은 생각을 하들 못해?”
“조급해마세요,”라며 흰눈이 말했어요. “어떻게든 도와볼 테니까요.” 그러면서 그녀가 가위를 호주머니에서 꺼내더니 싹둑 하고 수염 끝을 잘라버렸답니다.
풀려나자마자 난쟁이는 나무뿌리 사이에 놓아두었던 금이 잔뜩 든 보따리를 움켜 안으며 엄청 투덜거리면서 말했어요.
“인간들은 죄다 글러먹었다니까, 내 고운 수염을 자르다니. 애끼 이 버릇없는 것들!”
그러더니 보따리를 등에 둘러메곤 아이들에겐 눈길 한 번 주지 않고 횡 하니 사라져버렸어요.
얼마 후 흰눈이와 빨간 장미가 물고기를 한 마리 잡으러 갔어요.
그들이 개울가에 도착해보니 거대한 메뚜기 한 마리 같은 게 막 물 앞에서 금방이라도 물에 풍덩할 거처럼 폴짝폴짝 점프를 해대고 있지 뭐에요.
그녀들이 뛰어가 보니 그건 그 난쟁이였어요.
“또 뭘 하고 계세요?”라며 빨간 장미가 말했어요. “물에 뛰어들려는 건 아닌 거 같은데요?”
“내가 바본 줄 알아!”라며 난쟁이가 발끈해 소리쳤어요. “저 빌어먹을 물고기가 나를 끌어당기고 있는 게 안 보여?”
그래요, 난쟁이가 낚시를 하려고 앉아 있다 나쁜 마음씨를 가진 바람이 휙 하고 그의 수염을 낚싯줄에 꼬아놓았던 거예요, 그러자마자 큰 물고기 한 마리가 덥석 그 수염을 물었던 거지요. 게다가 힘없는 난쟁이는 그걸 도로 잡아당길 만큼 힘이 없든지라, 물고기가 도리어 그를 계속해서 자기 쪽으로 당기고 있어서 이 사단이 난 거였어요.
난쟁이는 주변의 풀 조각들을 죄다 잡아보며 버텨보았지만 모두 헛수고였죠. 점점 물고기 쪽으로 끌려가 조금만 더 있었다가는 완전히 물에 빠져 죽게 생겼던 거예요.
마침 시기적절하게 소녀들이 도착한 거지요.
소녀들이 그를 단단히 잡고 낚싯줄에서 수염을 풀어보려 시도해보았지만 모두 허사였어요.
수염이 자기들끼리 너무 단단히도 헝클어져 있었거든요.
결국 어쩔 수 없이 이번에도 가위를 꺼내 수염을 싹둑 잘라주었지요. 그래서 수염이 조금 또 잘리게 되었답니다.
그걸 본 난쟁이는 비명을 질러댔죠.
“저 독버섯 같은 것들이 내 얼굴을 망가뜨려놓은 것 좀 봐? 내 수염 한쪽을 또 잘랐어? 그것도 가장 보기 좋은 수염을 잘랐다고. 이제 어떻게 내 친구들에게 얼굴을 내밀어. 이 신발짝보다 못한 것들아!”
그런 다음 난쟁이는 수풀들 속에 놓아두었던, 진주가 가득 든 자루를 꺼내들더니, 고맙단 말 한마디 남기지 않고 휙 하니 돌 뒤로 사라져버렸답니다.
그러다 머지않아 제대로 사단이 벌어지고 말았죠.
엄마가 두 아이를 마을로 보내 바늘과 실 그리고 레이스(끈)와 리본들을 사오게 심부름을 보냈답니다.
그러려면 거대한 바위가 여기저기 흩뿌려져 있는 황야를 지나야했지요.
그런데 큰 새 한 마리가 공중에서 빙빙 돌더니 천천히 소녀들 상공을 돌더니 천천히 또 천천히 내려오더니 급기야 소녀들 바로 근처에 앉지 뭐예요.
곧바로 크나크고 도움을 요하는 비명 소리가 들려왔어요.
소녀들이 뛰어 올라가보니 독수리가 낯이 익은 그 난쟁이를 움켜잡고는 날아오르려 하고 있던 찰나였어요.
아이들은 난쟁이가 가엾단 생각에 그를 꼭 붙잡고서 독수리를 상대로 줄다리기를 오랫동안 하였답니다.
마침내 독수리가 포기하고 노획물(난쟁이)을 두고 날아가 버렸지요.
감금상태에서 풀려나자마자 난쟁이는 새된 목소리를 꽥 지르더니 말했어요.
“더 조심해서 당겼어야지! 너희들이 내 갈색 외투를 너무 세게 잡아당기는 바람에 다 찢어지고 구멍투성이가 되고 말았잖아, 이 천하에 도움 안 되는 꼴사나운 인간들아!”
그러더니 그는 보석들이 잔득 든 자루를 집어 들더니 바위 아래에 있던 구멍 속으로 또다시 쏙 미끄러져 들어가 사라지고 말았지요.
이때쯤에는 소녀들도 이 배은망덕한 난쟁이에게 익숙해있던 터라 가던 길을 계속 가 마을로 가 물건들(바늘, 실, 레이스, 끈들)을 샀더랬죠.
그녀들이 집에 돌아가려고 그 황야를 다시 건너는데, 이렇게 늦게까지 황야에 누가 올 거라곤 전혀 생각지 못한 그 난쟁이가 자신의 자루에서 보석들을 깨끗한 땅바닥 위에 죄다 쏟아붓고 있다, 소녀들을 발견하곤 화들짝 놀라고 말았죠.
그 보석들이 저녁놀을 받아 사방으로 빛을 내뿜고 있었답니다.
보석들이 어찌나 아름답게 사방사방 사방으로 빛을 발하며 반짝이는지 그만 아이들도 입이 딱 벌려져 멍하니 바라보고 있었지 뭐예요.
“왜 거기 우두커니 서 있는 게야?”라며 난쟁이가 꽥 하고 소리를 질렀어요. 회색 잿빛이던 그의 얼굴은 이제 분노로 시뻘건 구릿빛이 되어 있었어요. 
난쟁이가 막 욕을 하려던 찰나, 으르렁거리는 소리가 크게 한 번 들리더니, 그 검은 곰이 숲에서 나와 그들 쪽으로 빠른 걸음으로 달려오고 있었어요.  
난쟁이가 기겁을 하며 펄쩍 뛰었지만, 도로 자신의 동굴 속으로 들어가진 못했어요, 그 곰이 이미 너무도 가까이에 와 있었거든요.
그때 애간장(마음)이 다 무너지는 소리로 난쟁이가 소리쳤어요.
“곰 씨, 제발, 저를 살려주세요, 내 모든 보물들을 드리리다. 보시구려, 여기 놓은 이 아름다운 보석들을! 그러니 내 생명만 살려주시오, 나 같은 쪼무라기(작은 친구)를 어찌해서 무얼 하겠소? 간에 기별도 가지 않을 게요. 자, 여기 이 마음씨 나쁜 소녀들을 잡아먹으시구려, 얘들은 살이 보드라워 식욕을 돋우기에 그만이오, 살찐 메추라기란 말이오. 자 얘네 들을 드시고 난 살려주시오!”
난쟁이의 말에 곰은 한 마디 대꾸도 않고 그냥 자신의 앞발로 인정사정없이 이 사악한 자식을 한 방 갈겨버렸지요. 그리하여 난쟁이는 두 번 다시 움직이지 못했지요.
아가씨들은 너무 놀라 달아나기 시작했어요.
하지만 그 곰이 아가씨들을 향해 소리쳤어요.
“흰눈이와 빨간 장미, 두려워마요, 기다리라고, 나랑 같이 가줘.”
그제야 그녀들은 그 목소리를 알아보곤 기다렸지요. 그가 다가왔을 때 보니 순식간에 그의 곰 가죽이 벗겨지지 뭐예요.
온통 황금인 옷을 입은 잘생긴 남자가 거기 서 있었답니다.
“나는 실은 왕자요,”라며 그가 말했어요. “난 저 사악한 난쟁이의 마법에 걸렸던 것이오, 내 보물들을 훔쳐간 저 자 말이오. 그가 나를 야만적인 곰으로 변신시켜 숲을 헤매고 다니게 했소. 이제 난쟁이가 죽어 내가 마법에서 풀려난 거랍니다. 그(난쟁이)는 지금 죽어 마땅한 응보(=죄)를 받은 거예요.”
흰눈이는 그와 결혼했어요. 그리고 빨간 장미는 그의 동생과 결혼했지요.
그들은 난쟁이가 자신의 동굴에 모아놓았던 막대한 보물들을 사이좋게 나누어가졌답니다.
나이 드신 엄마도 수년 동안 딸들과 함께 행복하고 평화롭게 살았지요.
엄마는 두 그루의 장미나무를 가지고 딸들에게 갔었는데, 창문 앞에 심어놓았답니다.
그래서 그 장미나무에선 매년 희고 새빨간 가장 아름다운 장미꽃들이 피어났답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「흰눈이와 빨간 장미」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「흰눈이와 빨간 장미」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter162.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



163. 영리한 하인



만약 지시받은 대로만 하지 않고 자신의 지혜에 따라 일을 처리하는 영리한 하인이 있다면, 그의 주인과 가정에 얼마나 복된 일이겠어요.
바로 그런 사람이었던 영리한 ‘존’(←영어이름임. 독일어 이름은 ‘한스’임)이 한 번은, 자기 주인에 의해 집 나간 소를 찾아오라 지시를 받고 밖으로 나갔지요.
그가 한 참도록 오지 않자, 주인이 생각했지요.
‘역시 충실한 존이야, 자기 일에 열심히 구나!“  
그런데 전혀 돌아올 기미가 보이지 않자, 주인은 그에게 뭔 사고가 난 게 아닌지 염려가 되어 직접 그를 찾으러 나섰지요.
주인은 한 참을 찾다 마침내 큰 들판을 위 아래로 뛰어다니고 있는 그 하인을 발견했답니다.
“어이, 존.”라며 주인은 그가 있는 곳까지 나아갔을 때 말했지요. “찾으라고 보낸 소는 발견했니?”
“아뇨, 주인님.”라며 그가 대답했어요. “소라곤 단 한 마리도 못 본 걸요, 게다가 저는 그걸 찾았던 것도 아니고요.”
“그럼 뭘 찾아다녔던 거니, 존?”
“더 좋은 거요, 기가 막힌 걸 발견했거든요.”
“그게 뭔데, 존?”
“지빠귀(=참새) 세 마리요.”라며 하인이 대답했어요. 
“그게 어디 있는데?”라며 주인이 물었죠.
“한 마리는 보이고, 다른 한 마리는 들리고, 지금 세 번째 녀석을 뒤쫓고 있어요.”라며 영리한 하인이 대답했어요.
이 사례에서 보셨다시피, ‘여러분들의 주인’과 ‘지시사항’들에 골머리를 앓지 마시고 스스로 머리를 좀 굴려 보세요, 몸이 편해진답니다, 그럼 여러분들도 총명한 존만큼이나 영리하다는 말을 들으며 살 수 있으세요.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「영리한 하인」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「영리한 하인」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter163.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



164. 유리관



가난한 재봉사가 큰일을 도모할 수 없고 명성을 누리지 못하리라 누구도 말하지 마세요.
중요한 건 그가 옳은 길로 가고 있는가, 그리고 그 일이 중요한 줄을 아는가, 그리고 결국 운을 거머쥐었는가 하는 거지요.
친절하고 솜씨 좋은 수습 재봉사 한 명이 한 번은 세상을 여행하다 울창한 숲에 들어가게 되었는데 어찌나 숲이 울창한지 길이고 뭐고 완전히 방향감각을 잃고 말았답니다.
밤이 내리자, 머물 곳이 아무 것도 없어서, 울적한 고독을 달랠만한 잠자리 비슷한 거라고 찾게 되었지요.
그는 분명 보드라운 이끼 같은 푹신한 잠자리를 찾았는지 몰라요, 하지만 그리되면 야생 들짐승들 탓에 무사할 수 없겠죠. 
마침내 그가 어쩔 수 없이 나무속에서 밤을 지샐 결심을 하게 되었답니다.
때마침 높은 떡갈나무 하나를 발견했기에, 그 꼭대기에 올라가, 잠자리를 주신 하느님께 감사기도를 올렸답니다.
그렇지만 바람이 웬만큼 쌔야죠, 그 나무꼭대기에서 정말이지 날아가지 않은 게 다행일 정도였죠.
무섭고 떨면서 어둠 속에서 몇 시간을 보낸 그의 눈에 그리 멀지 않은 곳에 어렴풋한 불빛이 보였어요. 아무래도 사람이 거기 사는 것 같았어요. 나뭇가지 위보단 거기가 낫겠다 생각한 그가 조심해가며 내려와 그쪽으로 향했지요.
그건 갈대와 수풀로 엮은 자그마한 오두막이었어요.
그가 용기를 내 노크를 하니 문이 열리더니 불빛이 새어나오는 가운데 다채로운 옷감으로 꿰매 만든 망토를 입은 백발의 노인 난쟁이 한 명이 나왔어요. 
“누구요, 뭘 바라슈?”라며 난쟁이가 불평스런 목소리로 말했어요.
“저는 가련한 재봉사입니다.”라며 그가 대답했어요. “황야 여기서 하룻밤만 묵을 수 없을까 해서요, 부탁드리니 아침까지만 당신의 오두막에서 머물게 해주십시오.”
“썩 가시오.”라며 노인이 퉁명스런 어조로 대꾸했어요. “뜨내기들관 엮이긴 싫소. 다른 데 가서 숙소를 알아보시오.”
이 말과 함께 그가 막 문을 세차게 닫으려는데, 재봉사가 그의 망토를 부여잡으며 사정 사정 통사정을 하며 부탁을 드렸지요.
그 바람에 원래 모진 사람이 아니었던 그 노인이 동정심이 생겨 마음이 누그러지며 그를 안으로 들이고 먹을 것도 좀 주었답니다. 그리곤 구석 좋은 침대에서 누울 수 있게 해주었지요.
워낙에 고단하던 재봉사에게 자장가도 필요 없었죠. 아침까지 꿀잠을 잤거든요. 아마도 엄청난 소음이 그를 깨우지 않았다면 절대 일어날 생각을 하지 않았을 정도로요.
비명소리와 으르렁거리는 굉음이 난폭하게 오두막의 얇은 벽을 뚫고 들려왔어요.
이례적으로 용기가 난 재봉사가 화들짝 일어나 옷을 급히 챙겨 입곤 나가보았어요.
오두막 바로 가까이에서 엄청 큰 검은 황소 한 마리와 아름다운 수사슴이 죽기 살기로 싸울 준비를 하고 있지 뭐예요.
곧 그들이 서로에게 달려들더니 땅이 흔들릴 정도로 서로를 밟아 뭉개기 시작했어요.
공기가 그들의 기합소리에 맞추어 진동할 정도였지요.
한참이 지나도록 어느 쪽이 이길지 점칠 수가 없었어요. 그때 마침내 수사슴이 자신의 뿔로 적의 몸통을 꿰뚫는데 성공했어요. 그 즉시 황소가 엄청난 굉음을 내지르며 땅에 쓰러졌고, 수사슴이 연이어 몇 방 더 먹이자 황소도 완전히 절명하고 말았죠.
기겁을 하며 지켜보고 있던 재봉사가 꼼짝달싹도 못하고서 서 있기만 하는데, 재봉사가 정신을 차리고 달아나기도 전에, 승리감에 취한 그 수사슴이 오더니 자신의 거대한 뿔로 재봉사를 붙들어버렸어요.
재봉사는 생각할 겨를이 없었어요. 왜냐면 수사슴이 너무도 빨리 돌이며 나무밑동이며 산이며 골짜기며 숲이며 늪을 날쌔게 뛰어넘으며 달리는 바람에 재봉사로선 정신을 차리려야 차릴 수가 없었던 거지요.  
그는 두 손으로 뿔의 윗부분을 잡고 있기에 급급해하며 자신의 운명을 한탄하며 날아가고 있다는 인상만 받았더랬죠.
마침내 수사슴이 ‘암벽’(솟아오른 바위) 앞에 멈추더니 서서히 재봉사를 내려주었어요.
살았는지 죽었는지 정신을 못차리겠는 재봉사는 그러고도 한참이 지나서야 가까스로 정신을 차릴 수가 있었답니다.
그가 좀 회복될 때까지 그 수사슴이 그의 옆에서 지키고 서 있다 뿔로 암벽에 있던 문을 세게 밀었지요. 그랬더니 문이 덜컹하고 열렸어요. 곧 그 문에서 불길이 뿜어져 나오더니 뒤이어 거대한 연기가 자욱이 피어나며 수사슴의 모습을 삼켜버렸어요.
그 바람에 재봉사로선 어찌해야할 바를 몰랐어요, 거기서 돌아 나와 이 황무지를 빠져나가 다시 사람들에게로 가야할지 말아야할지를 말이죠.
그가 갈팡질팡 서 있자니, 돌에서 목소리 하나가 들리며 그를 불렀어요.
“겁내지 말고 들어오시오, 당신을 해칠 건 아무것도 없소.”
그는 못내 머뭇거리다 뭔가 알수 없는 힘에 이끌려 그 목소리의 말을 따라 철제 문을 통과해 들어갔지요. 
철제 문 안에는 거대하고 넓은 홀(공간)이 하나 나왔어요. 그 천정과 별들과 마루는 죄다 반짝반짝 빛나는 사각형 대리석들이었어요. 그 대리석들 하나하나에는 그가 모를 글씨들이 새겨져 있었어요.
그가 경탄해마지 않아하며 쳐다보고 있자니, 다시 지침 같은 목소리가 들려왔어요.
“홀 가운데 놓여 있는 돌을 밟으시오, 큰 행운이 당신을 기다리고 있소이다.”
그는 이미 충분히 들뜬 상태인지라 그 말을 따를 충분한 준비가 되어 있었지요.
발로 그 돌을 밟자 돌이 서서히 가라앉으며 아래층으로 내려갔어요.
돌이 바닥에 닿자, 재봉사는 주변을 둘러보았고, 자신이 앞서의 홀과 크기가 비슷한 또 다른 홀에 와 있단 사실을 알았지요.  
하지만 여긴 경이로운 게 더 많았어요.
벽들 속에 속이 빈 공간들이 있는데, 그 공간 안에 온통 다채로운 영혼 또는 푸른 빛을 띤 수증기 같은 게 가득 든 투명한 유리로 된 꽃병들이 서 있었지요.
그 홀의 바닥엔 두 개의 거대한 유리 상자가 서로 마주보며 서 있어 이게 그의 호기심을 강하게 끌어당겼어요.
그가 그 유리 상자들 중 하나로 가서 안을 들여다보니 농가(농부의 집)들로 둘러싸인 성 같은 멋진 구조물이 하나 보였고, 그 농가들 주변으론 마구간이며 헛간 그리고 그 밖의 농가 부속건물들이 가득 보였어요.
모든 것이 조그마했어요, 하지만 비범하게도 세심하고 조밀하게 만든 것들이어서 마치 누군가가 엄청난 꼼꼼함으로 기민하게(빈틈없이) 수작업을 해 조각한 것만 같았답니다.
그 조각물이 어찌나 진기한지 만약 목소리가 또 다시 들리지 않았다면 그는 정신없이 보고만 있었을 거예요.
그가 목소리를 쫓아 반대편에 서 있던 다른 유리 상자로 가서 안을 들여다보았어요.
그런데 그 안엔 심쿵할 정도로 빼어난 미모의 아가씨가 보여 그의 놀라움이 한층 더 하더지 뭐예요!
그녀는 마치 잠든 것 같았어요, 그녀의 기다린 머릿결이 마치 소중한 옷 마냥 그녀를 감싸고 있었지요.
그녀는 눈을 꼭 감고 있었지만, 얼굴빛의 밝음이나 숨을 들이쉬고 마실 때마다 움직이는 ‘리본’(머리의 리본)으로 보아서는 살아 있는 게 분명했지요.
재봉사가 심장을 쿵쾅거리며 그 미녀를 쳐다보고 있는데, 그녀가 불쑥 두 눈을 뜨더니 그를 보곤 기쁨의 두려움에 어쩔줄 몰라했어요.
“고마워라!”라며 그녀가 소리쳤어요. “제 구원자께서 와 계셨군요! 어서, 어서, 저를 이 감옥에서 풀어주세요. 이 유리관의 ‘빗장’(가로 막대기)을 뒤로 당기시면 제가 나갈 수 있답니다.”
재봉사는 지체 없이 그 말을 따랐고, 그 즉시 그녀가 유리 뚜껑 들어올리며 밖으로 나오더니 서둘러 홀의 구석으로 가 큰 망토로 자신의 알몸을 감쌌어요.
그런 다음 그녀는 돌 위에 앉더니, 젊은이보고 가까이 오라 말했어요.
그 후 그녀는 그의 입술에 우정의 키스로 도장을 찍어주며 말했지요.
“제 오랜 기다리심이어, 구원자시어, 자애로운 하느님이 당신을 인도해 제게로 오시게 했어요, 이제 제 슬픔들은 끝이랍니다. 제 슬픔이 끝나는 날 당신의 행복이 시작되게 된 거지요. 당신은 하늘에 의해 제 남편으로 선택되시었어요, 깨질 수 없는 기쁨, 깨질 수 없는 사랑이시어, 당신으로 말미암아 지상에 복이 넘치고 있어요. 자 앉아 보세요, 그리고 이제부터 제가 들려드리는 이야기에 귀 기울여주세요.”
“저는 부유한(부자인) 백작의 딸이에요. 제 부모님은 제가 여리던 어린 시절 이미 돌아가셨죠. 부모님은 유언으로 저를 제 큰 오빠에게 맡기셨어요. 그가 저를 키워주었죠. 우린 서로 다정하게 사랑을 했어요. 성향이며 사고방식이 너무도 닮았거든요. 우리 둘은 절대 결혼하지 않고 죽을 때까지 함께 살자 결심을 하였더랬죠. 저희 집엔 친구들이 부족했어요, 그래서 이웃 분들과 친구들이 종종 저희를 방문하곤 했었지요. 그럼 우리를 그들 모두를 최대한 다정하게 환대했답니다. 그러다 한번은 어느 저녁에 낮선 이가 말을 타고 저희 성에 와 다음 마을까지 가지 못했다며 하룻밤 묵고 가게 해 달라 청했지요. 저흰 당연히 그의 청을 받아주었지요, 그는 저녁식사 시간동안 호의적인 태도를 보이며 자신의 얘기들을 재미나게 하였더랬죠. 제 오빠가 곧 그 낯선 이가 좋아져 며칠 더 우리와 같이 머물다 가시라 청했어요. 그도 크게 서두를 것이 없었기에 동의했죠. 저희는 밤늦도록 이야기꽃을 피우다, 그 낯선 이에게 방을 안내해주었지요. 저도 피곤했기에 제 부드러운 침대에 팔다리를 쭉 뻗으며 누웠답니다. 얼마자지 않아 희미하지만 분명 즐거움인 음악소리가 저를 깨웠어요. 그게 어디서 나는지 알려고 옆방에서 자고 있는 시녀를 부르려고 했지만 뭔가 알 수 없는 힘에 의해 제가 말 한 마디도 못하는 것을 보고 깜짝 놀랐답니다. 산이 마치 제 가슴을 내리누르는 듯 숨이 막혀 저는 입도 벙긋할 수 없었지요. 한편 침실에 켜놓은 야간등의 불빛에 그 낯선 사람이 단단히 빗장(가로 막대기)이 걸린 문 두 개를 통과해 제 방으로 오는 게 보였지요. 그는 제게 오더니 말했어요. ‘내가 당신을 너무도 사랑하기에 마술의 기교를 부려 사랑스런 연주소리가 들리게 해 당신을 깨웠소.’ 하지만 저는 그가 마술의 기교를 부렸다는 사실에 강한 반감 비슷한 것이 생겨 그에게 한 마디 대꾸도 해주지 않았지요. 그는 꿈쩍도 않고 한동안 거기 서서 저의 호의적인 대답을 기다리며 말없이 있었지요. 하지만 그래도 제가 아무 말이 없자 자신의 자긍심에 상처를 입혔다며 이 일로 복수하고 말리라 화를 내며 선언하고 방을 떠났지요. 저는 거친 불안과 동요로 그날 밤을 지세고 아침이 되어서야 간신히 눈을 붙일 수 있었어요. 저는 깨어나자마자 급히 제 친오빠에게로 달려가 보았지만 그는 이미 방에 없었어요. 수행원들이 제게 말하길, 새벽이 트자마자 친오빠가 그 낯선 사람과 함께 말을 타고 나갔다고 해요. 그 의도가 너무도 의심스럽던 저는 서둘러 옷을 챙겨 입고 제 승마용 말에 안장(말을 타는 도구)을 채우게 해 한 명의 하인만 저를 뒤따르게 하곤 손살 같이 그 숲으로 향했지요. 그러다 하인이 탄 말의 다리가 부러지는 바람에 그는 더는 저를 쫓아올 수 없었지요. 그래도 저는 멈추지 않고 달렸고 곧 몇 분이 지나지 않아 그 낯선 자가 새끼 끈에 아름다운 수사슴 한 마리를 묶어 저 쪽으로 오고 있는 게 보였지요. 저는 그에게 ‘제 오빠는 어디 있나요, 이 수사슴은 어떻게 된 거죠, 왜 이 수사슴의 커다란 눈망울이 저를 보며 울고 있나요?’라고 물었지요. 제게 대답대신 그는 큰 소리로 웃기 시작했어요. 이에 저는 분통이 터져 제 권총을 꺼내 그 괴물을 향해 발사했지만, 총알이 그의 가슴에서 되 튕겨져 나와 제가 탄 말의 머리를 관통해버리는 바람에 저는 땅바닥에 쓰러지고 말았지요. 그러자 그가 뭐라 뭐라 주문을 외우는 바람에 저는 정신을 잃어버렸답니다. 제가 다시 의식을 차렸을 때는 전 이 지하 동굴 속 유리관에 갇혀 있는 저를 발견하고 말았죠. 그 마술사가 다시 나타나더니 제 친오빠를 수사슴으로 변신시켰다 말하더군요. 그리고 제가 소유하고 있던 모든 것들을 성(성곽 할 때의 성)과 함께 마법으로 축소시켜 또 다른 유리관 속에 가두었다고 말했어요. 그와 함께 제 사람들(하인들)도 모두 연기로 변해서 유리 술병들 속에 갇히고 말았지요. 그가 제게 말했어요. ‘내 요구를 순순히 들어주면 일도 쉽게 풀리고 모든 걸 예전 상태로 돌려주겠소. 내가 이 병들을 다시 열기만 하면 모든 게 예전대로 돌아갈 거요.’ 저는 제가 맨 처음에 했듯 일언반구도 해주지 않았어요. 그는 사라졌고 저는 이 감옥에 남겨진 채로 깊은 잠에 빠지고 말았답니다. 환상들이 제 눈앞을 지나가는 동안, 어느 젊은 분이 제게로 다가오시더니 저를 마법에서 풀어주시는 환상이 그 중 가장 격려가 되었는데, 오늘 이렇게 눈을 뜨고 보니 당신이 제 앞에 계시지 뭐예요, 제 꿈이 이루어진 걸 보게 되다니요. 어서 제가 환상들에서 보았던 다른 일들도 이룰 수 있게 도와주세요. 우선, 성이 갇힌 저 유리관을 널찍한 돌 위로 운반해주세요.”(←백작의 딸의 대사 모두 끝)

그 돌에 올려놓자마자, 유리관이 아가씨와 청년과 함께 위층으로 오르기 시작해 위층에 있던 홀의 천정 ‘개구부’(열린 부분)를 통해 완전히 상승해 탁 트인 공기 밖으로 그들이 다시 나올 수 있었어요.
아가씨가 그 뚜껑을 열자, 갇혀 있던 성과 말들과 농가(농부의 집)들이 쭉 뻗어지며 엄청난 속도로 본래의 크기로 자라던지 경이로울 정도였지요.
그런 후, 아가씨와 재봉사는 다시 땅 밑 동굴로 돌아가, 이번에는 연기들이 가득 담긴 병들을 그 돌로 운반해 지상으로 가져왔어요.
아가씨가 그 병들을 열자마자 푸른빛이 도는 연기들이 빠져나오며 본래 사람의 모습으로 변했어요. 그건 정말 그녀의 하인들과 사람들이었어요.
그녀의 기쁨의 최고조는, 황소의 형상(모습)으로 변해 그 마법사를 죽인 친오빠가 다시 인간의 모습을 하고서 숲에서 나오는 모습을 볼 때였답니다.
같은 날 바로, 아가씨는 자신의 약속대로 교회 재단(탁자)에서 자신의 손을 이 행운덩어리 재봉사에게 건넸답니다(결혼했다는 의미임^^ 축하축하~!!).
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「유리관」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「유리관」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter164.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



165. 게으름뱅이 하인츠



하인츠(영어식 이름은 ‘해리’. 등장인물들의 이름만 독일식 이름으로 해 해석했습니다. 다만 이 포스팅은 영어동화를 해석한 것임.)는 게으름뱅이였어요.
하는 일이라곤 기껏 자신의 염소를 몰고 매일 풀밭으로 가는 것뿐이었지요.
그럼에도 불구하고 집에 돌아오면 매일의 일이 고되다고 불평을 널어놓았죠.
“아 정말 고단하다.”라며 그가 말했어요. “매년 늦가을까지 이런 식으로 염소 한 마리를 들판으로 몰고 가는 건 정말 중노동이야, 지친다고! 드러누워 잠이 퍼 잤으면 좋으련만, 이건 뭐, 어린 나무에 다치지는 않는지, 아님 정원에 있는 울타리에 끼이지는 않는지, 아님 달아가는 건 아닌지 한 눈을 떼려야 뗄 수가 없다니까. 누가 내 수고 좀 안 들어가나?”
그가 퍼질러 앉아 곰곰이 생각에 잠겨 어떻게 하면 이 어깨 위의 짐을 내려놓을 수 있을까 고민했어요.
한참동안을 그렇게 생각 정리가 안 되더니, 갑자기 두 눈에서 비늘(물고기의 비늘)이 떨어지는 듯 기가 막힌 아이디어가 떠올랐어요.
“그래 이러면 되겠다.”라며 그가 소리쳤지요. “뚱땡이 ‘트리네’(←독일식 이름. 영어식 이름→트리나) 네도 염소 한 마리를 키우니까, 내가 그녀와 결혼하면 내 염소도 그녀보고 키우라고 하면 되잖아. 그럼 나는 편히 살 수 있는 거구.”
그리하여 하인츠가 서둘러 일어나 지친 다리를 이끌고 곧장 거리를 가로질러 가 다짜고짜 뚱땡이 트리네 부모님이 살고 있는 곳으로 가 “후덕하고 부지런한 따님과 결혼하고 싶습니다.”라고 말했어요.
부모님은 길게 생각해보고 자시고 할 것도 없이,
‘유유상종(끼리끼리 모임)이군.’이라고 생각하시곤 단번에 동의를 해주었어요.
그래서 뚱땡이 트리네는 이제 하인츠의 아내가 되어 염소 두 마리 다를 몰고 나가야했답니다.
하인츠은 좋은 시간을 보냈어요. 이제 남은 건 자신의 게으름뱅이 습성에 지치지만 않으면 되었죠.
그래도 가끔 그녀와 박으로 나갈 땐 이렇게 말했답니다.
“다녀와서 휴식을 좀 더 잘 즐기기 위해서야, 그렇지 않음 감흥이 덜 하더라고.” 
하지만 게으름이라면 뚱땡이 트리네도 더 하면 더 했지지지 않았죠.
“여봉~♥,”라며 그녀가 하루는 이렇게 말했어요. “우리 이렇게 고생할 게 뭐 있어요. 이런 식으로 우리 청춘을 다 보내야하겠느냐고요? 매일 아침 염소 두 마리가 우리 꿀잠을 방해하잖아요, 차라리 이럴 바에야 염소들을 이웃집에 줍시다, 그럼 그가 벌집을 우리에게 줄 거예요. 우린 그 벌집을 집 뒤 햇볕 잘 드는 곳에 걸어두기만 하면 돼요, 더 이상 고민할 것도 없다고요. 벌들이야 지들이 알아서 집과 들판을 오고 가는데, 우린 그냥 꿀이나 따면 된다고요.”
“그 참 기똥찬 소릴 하는 여잘세.”라며 하인츠가 대답했어요. “이런 일을 머뭇거릴 이유야 없지. 무엇보다 염소젖보단 꿀맛이 일품이지. 당장 그리 합시다.”
이웃집에선 이를 마다할 이유가 없는지라 냉큼 벌집 하나를 주고 염소 두 마리를 받아갔지요.
벌들은 매일 아침부터 밤늦게까지 지치지도 않고 벌집을 들락거리며 가장 향기 나는 꿀들로 꿀벌통을 채웠고, 그리하여 가을엔 하인츠는 한 가득 꿀을 담을 수 있었어요.
그들은 그 꿀단지를 침실 벽에 고정된 선반 위에 두고, 누가 훔쳐가지 않나 또는 생쥐에게 발각되지는 않나 하며 노심초사했지요.
트리네(하인츠의 아내)는 토실한 개암나무 회초리 하나를 주어다 자기 침대 옆 금방 손이 닿는 곳에 두고서 불청객들을 내쫓을 만반의 태세를 갖추고 있었답니다.
게으름뱅이 하인츠도 낮12시까지 침대에 머물렀죠.
“일찍 일어나는 새가,”라며 그가 말했어요. “돈을 한 푼이라도 더 쓰는 법이야.”
어느 날 아침 긴 잠에서 깨고서도 햇살 가득한 이불 속에서 여전히 누운 채로 그가 아내에게 말했어요.
“여자들은 달콤한 걸 좋아하는 법이지. 그러니 당신도 나 몰래 이 꿀맛을 보려할지 몰라. 당신이 이 꿀을 몽땅 다 먹어치우기 전에, 새끼 거위를 품은 거위 한 마리랑 바꾸자고.” 
“그렇지만,”라며 트리네가 대답했어요. “거위들을 돌볼 아이를 우리가 가질 때까진 안되요! 설마 저보고 어린 거위들이나 돌보며 제 정력을 그딴 쓸데없는 곳에 쏟아 부으란 소리는 아니죠.”
“왜 그렇게 생각해,”라며 하인츠가 말했어요. “아이들이 거위를 돌볼 거 같아? 요-즘-놈의 아이들이 얼마나 말을 안 듣는데. 지들 부모보다 자기들이 더 똑똑한 줄 알고 기들 생각대로만 하는 애들인데, 그 얘기 못 들어봤어, 아 글쎄 소 찾으러 보냈더니 지빠귀(=참새) 세 마리가 쫓고 있더라는 그 하인 얘기 말이야.”(“영리한 하인” 링크 ▶ http://blog.naver.com/osy2201/220927498462 )
“오,”라며 트리네가 대꾸했어요. “내 말을 안 듣는 아이가 있음! 내가 이렇게 회초리를 집어 들고서 살갗을 따끔하게 때려줄 텐데도요. 봐요, 하인츠.”
그녀가 혼자 열불이 나서 생쥐를 쫓으려고 놓아둔 그 회초리를 집어들었어요.
“봐요, 제가 요렇게, 요렇게 때려줄 거라고요!”
그녀가 팔을 뻗어 후려쳤어요. 그러다 불행하게도 침대 위에 있던 꿀단지를 치고 말았죠.
벽에 부딪힌 꿀단지가 산산조각 나며 떨어져, 맛난 꿀들이 바닥위로 줄줄 새고 말았어요.
“거위와 새끼거위들이 죄다 여기 누워있군.”라며 하인츠가 말했어요. “이제 돌볼 필요가 없어졌네. 그나마 꿀단지가 내 머리로 떨어지지 않아 다행이군. 이게 다 자기 복이지.”
그가 보고 있자니 파편조각 하나에 여전히 많은 꿀이 남아 있었어요. 그래서 그가 손을 뻗어 집어 들며 유쾌하게 말했어요.
“여기 좀 남았는데, 여보, 우리 이거 먹고 속 차립시다. 놀란 다음에는 뭐라도 먹어줘야 하니까. 중요한 건, 우리가 좀 더 자도 시간은 충분하다는 거야.”
“그래요,”라며 트리네도 대답했어요. “사람은 적당한 시기에 적당한 방법으로 배운다고 하잖아요. 그 얘기 들어보셨죠, 달팽이가 한 번은 결혼식에 초대받아 출발을 했다가 아기 세례식 때 도착했다는 얘기 말예요. 그 집 앞 울타리에 걸려 넘어지며 그 달팽이가 이렇게 말했지요. ‘빨리 가서 좋은 게 하나도 없다니까.’라고요.”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「게으름뱅이 하인츠」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「게으름뱅이 하인츠」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter165.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



166. 괴물새 그리핀



옛날 옛적에 왕이 한 분 살고 계셨습니다. 그가 다스린 왕국이 어딘지 뭐라고 부르는지 저는 모릅니다.
다만 그에겐 아들이 하나도 없고 딸만 한 명 있었는데 항상 아팠습니다. 어떤 의사도 그녀를 고칠 수 없었죠.
그러다 누군가가 왕에게 예언하길,
“공주님의 병은 사과를 드시면 낫습니다.”
라고 하였어요.
그래서 왕은 온 왕국에,
“누구든 내 딸애를 낮게 하는 사과를 가지고 오는 자에겐 딸애를 아내로 주고 이 나라의 왕도 시켜줄 것이다.” 
라고 선포하기에 이르렀죠.
이 소식이 세 아들을 둔 어느 농부의 귀에까지 흘러들어갔어요.
아빠가 장남에게 말했어요.
“정원에 가서 탐스럽게 잘 익은 사과 한 바구니만 따 가지고 궁전에 가 보거라, 혹시 공주님이 드시고 나으면 네가 그녀와 결혼도 하고 왕이 될지 누가 아니.”
젊은이가 그 말대로 했지요. 그가 출발했어요.
채 얼마 안 갔는데 젊은이는 좀 엄해 보이는 난쟁이를 한 명 만났어요. 난쟁이가 “바구니에 담긴 게 뭐지?”라고 물었어요.
그래서 ‘웰레’가 “개구리 다리요.”라고 대꾸했지요. 웰레는 그의 이름이었어요.
그러자 난쟁이가 말했어요.
“그럼 뭐, 그런 거고, 그것만 남아 있겠지.”
그리곤 난쟁이는 가 버렸답니다.
웰레가 마침내 궁전에 도착해 자신이 공주님을 드시면 병이 나을 사과들을 가지고 왔다 알려 달라 말했어요.
왕이 크게 반기며 얼른 웰레를 데려오라 말했어요.
하지만 아뿔싸! 그가 바구니를 열어보니 안에 든 건 사과가 아니라 개구리 다리들이지 않겠어요, 그것도 여전히 발길질을 해대고 있는 다리들이요.
벌컥 화가 난 왕이 그를 집으로 쫓아버렸어요.
집에 돌아온 그는 아빠께 어떤 일이 있었는가를 말씀드려야했지요.
다음으로 아빠는 둘째 아들을 보냈어요. 그의 이름은 ‘사메’였지요.
하지만 사메에게도 형 웰레와 똑같은 일이 벌어지고 말았답니다.
그도 그 난쟁이를 만났는데, “바구니에 뭐가 들었어?”라고 물어오는 거예요.
사메가 “돼지 털이요.”라고 말을 했더니, 엄숙해 보이는 그 난쟁이가 “그럼 뭐, 그런 거고, 그것만 남아 있겠지.”라고 말하지 않겠어요.
사메가 궁전에 도착해 “공주님을 구할 사과들을 가지고 왔어요.”라고 말을 했더니, 병사들이 한사코 안으로 들이려하질 않았어요.
“벌써 한 놈 때문에 우리들만 된서리만 맞았다. 썩 꺼져!”
하지만 사메가 “이건 진짜 사과에요. 저는 꼭 들어가 봐야한다고요.”라고 주장하자, 그제야 병사들이 그를 믿고 왕께 데려다주었어요.
하지만 그가 바구니를 까자 돼지 털밖에 없지 뭐예요.
정말 꼭지가 돈 왕이 채찍질까지 해가며 사메를 집으로 내쫓아버렸어요.
집에 돌아온 그가 자초지종을 아빠께 말씀드렸지요.
그러자 막내가 자기도 사과를 들고 가보겠다고 우기고 나서지 뭐예요. 그의 이름은 ‘한스’(독일사람이란 뜻임)인데, 항상 ‘바보 한스’라 불리는 자였지요.
“얼씨구!”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “네가 잘도 가겠다! 너보다 더 영리한 형들도 다 저 모양 저 꼴이 되었는데, 네가 뭘 어쩌겠다는 거야?”
하지만 청년은 막무가내로 말했어요.
“정말, 아빠, 저도 가볼래요.”
“아서라, 이 어리석은 녀석아, 넌 좀 더 똑똑해질 때까진 안 돼.”라고 아빠가 말하며 등을 돌렸지요.
하지만 한스는 아빠의 작업복, ‘프록 코트’라고 부르는 거지요, 끄트머리를 부여잡곤 말했어요.
“정말, 아빠, 저도 가고 싶단 말예요.”
“그래, 그럼, 가 봐라, 하지만 내 장담하건데 넌 가자마자 바로 오게 될 게다!”라며 노인이 짓궂은 말투로 대꾸했어요.
하지만 청년은 뛸 듯이 기뻐 정말로 폴짝폴짝 뛰어다녔지요.
“또, 바보처럼 구는구나! 넌 어떻게 된 게 매일 더 멍청해진다니!”라며 아빠가 또 말했어요.
하지만 한스는 별 상관 안했죠, 괜히 자기 기분만 망칠 필욘 없었으니까요. 
하지만 시간이 마침 밤인지라 내일 아침까지 기다렸다 출발 해야겠다 생각했지요. 어차피 오늘 중으로 궁전에 도착할 수 없으니까요.
긴 밤 동안 그는 잠을 잘 수가 없었어요, 잠시 졸립다 가도 아리따운 아가씨며 궁전이며 금이며 은, 기타 등등의 것들이 눈앞에 가물거려서요.
새벽 일찍 그가 길을 떠났답니다. 곧이어 살짝 거지꼴을 한 그 난쟁이가 옷에 다리미질까지 하고선 나타나 “그 바구니 속에 뭐가 들었니?”라고 물어왔어요.
하스가 “공주님이 드시고 병이 나을 사과들을 들고 가요.”라고 답해주었죠.
“그럼 뭐,”라며 난쟁이가 말했어요. “그런 거고, 그것만 남아 있겠지.”
하지만 궁전에 도착해보니 병사들이 죽어도 한스를 안에 들이지 않겠다고 우기지 뭐예요. 
“왜냐면 벌써 두 바보가 사과를 들고 왔다 속이곤 개구리 다리와 돼지 털만 가져온 통에 이젠 아무도 못 믿겠다.”는 거지요. 
하지만 한스도 절대지지 않고 “이건 정말 개구리 다리가 아니에요, 왕국에서 제일 탐스럽고 맛난 사과들을 몇 개 따온 거란 말이에요.”라고 주장했지요.
한스의 말에 떨림이 없었기에, 문지기가 거짓말이 아닐 거라 생각하고서 그를 안으로 들였지요. 역시나 문지기의 생각이 옳았어요, 왜냐면 한스가 왕의 얼굴 앞에서 바구니를 열자마자 탐스런 황금 사과들이 짠하고 나타났기 때문이지요.
왕이 기뻐서 사람을 시켜 사과 몇 개를 공주에게 가져다주게 하곤, 결과가 어떤지 무척 걱정하며 기다리고 있었더랬죠.
많이 걸리지도 않아 소식이 전해졌어요. 소식을 전하러 누가 왔게요? 바로 공주님이 직접 왔지 뭐예요!
공주가 사과를 먹자마자 병이 나아 침대에서 벌떡 뛰어내렸던 거에요.
왕의 기쁨은 상상 그 이상이었지요!
하지만 그렇다고 자신의 딸을 바보 한스에게 주는 건 전혀 다른 문제였지요.
그래서 왕은 한스보고 “물에서보다 마른 땅에서 더 빨리 나아가는 보트를 우선 만들어 와야 한다.”라고 말했어요.
한스도 그 제안에 선뜻 동의했지요.
그가 집으로 와 아빠께 그동안에 있었던 일을 말씀드렸어요.
그래서 아빠가 장남인 ‘웰레’를 숲으로 보내 그런 종류의 보트를 만들어오게 시켰어요.
그는 부지런히 일했어요. 시종일관 휘파람도 불었죠.
낮12시가 되어 태양이 하늘 꼭대기에 떴을 때, 엄숙한 표정의 그 난쟁이가 또 찾아와 “뭘 만드는데?”라고 물어왔어요.
웰레가 대답을 해주었지요.
“부엌에 쓸 나무 그릇들.”
엄숙한 표정의 난쟁이가 말했어요.
“그럼 뭐, 그런 거고, 그것만 남겠지.”
저녁이 되어 보트가 완성됐다고 여긴 웰레가 타려고보니 원 세상에 보트는 온데간데없고 나무 그릇들만 남아있지 뭐예요.
다음날엔 둘째아들인 ‘사메’가 숲에 갔어요.
하지만 장남 웰레에게 일어났던 일이 그대로 사메에게 또 일어나고 말았죠.
셋째 날엔 바보 한스가 갔어요.
그는 정말 부지런히 일했지요. 한바탕 일하는 소리가 온 숲에 울릴 정도였지요. 시종일관 그는 노래도 부르고 흥겨운 휘파람도 불었지요.
낮 12시가 되어 가장 무더워질 때쯤, 그 난쟁이가 또 찾아와 “뭘 만드는데?”라고 물어왔어요.
“물에서보다 마른 땅에서 더 빨리 나아가는 보트요.”라고 한스가 대꾸했지요. “이것만 다 만들고 나면, 제가 공주님과 결혼할 수 있거든요.”
“그럼 뭐,”라며 그 난쟁이가 말했어요. “그런 거고, 그것만 남겠지.”
저녁이 되서 태양이 황금빛으로 변할 때쯤 한스는 요구되던 그 보트를 다 만들었지요.
그는 그걸 타고서 궁전까지 노를 저어갔어요.
보트는 강풍만큼이나 재빨리 나아갔답니다.
멀찍이에서 그걸 보고 있던 왕은 그럼에도 불구하고 자신의 딸을 저런 바보 멍청이에겐 절대 주고 싶지 않았어요.
그래서 왕이 말했지요.
“우선 백 마리의 토끼들을 목초지로 몰고 가서 이른 아침부터 밤늦도록 지키거라. 만약 한 마리라도 없어지면 내 딸을 줄 수 없다.”
한스는 이 제안에도 동의했어요.
그래서 다음날 그가 토끼 떼를 이끌고 목초지로 가 한 마리도 도망가지 못하게 열심히 망을 보며 지키고 있었더랬죠.  
몇 시간 지나지 않아 궁에서 하녀가 한명 오더니 한스보고 “즉시 토끼 한 마리를 주셔야겠습니다. 뜻밖의 손님들이 와 계시거든요.”라고 말했어요.
하지만 한스는 그 수작을 단번에 알아채고 “절대 못 줘요. 토끼라면 내일 잡아도 되잖아요.”라고 말했지요.
하지만 그 하녀도 어지간해선 물러서지 않으려 했지요, 급기야 그녀가 한스보고 마구 욕을 하기 시작했어요.
그래도 한스는 말했지요.
“정 그렇다면 공주님이 직접 오시면 제가 믿고 한 마리를 드리지요.”
하녀가 궁전으로 가 그 말을 전하자, 공주가 직접 찾아왔어요.
하지만 그 사이에 난쟁이가 또 한스를 찾아와 “뭐하고 있는데?”라고 물어왔어요.
한스가 말했어요.
“한 마리도 도망 못 가게 망을 보고 있어요, 그렇게만 되면 제가 공주님이랑 결혼해 왕이 될 수 있거든요.”
“그 좋군,”라며 난쟁이가 말했어요. “내 그럼 자네에게 피리 하나를 주지. 토끼가 도망가면 이걸 불게 그럼 다시 돌아올 테니.”
그리하여 공주가 도착하고, 한스가 그녀의 앞치마에 토끼 한 마리를 담아 주었을 때, 그리고 그녀가 채 백발자국쯤 갔을 때, 한스가 피리를 불자, 그 토끼가 앞치마에서 깡충 뛰어내려 토끼 무리 속으로 되돌아오게 된 거지요.
저녁이 되자 토끼 지킴이 한스는 한 차례 더 피리를 불어 모든 토끼들이 도착했는지 확인한 다음 그들을 몰고 궁전으로 돌아왔답니다.
한스가 정말 토끼 한 마디도 잃지 않고 도착하는 꼴을 본 왕은 쓰러지기 일보직전이었죠. 그럼에도 절대 자신의 딸을 줄 수 없다 다짐한 왕이 “그럼 좋다. 그리핀(그리스 신화 속 괴물. 독수리의 머리와 날개에, 사자의 몸을 한 괴물)의 꼬리에서 깃털 하나만 가져오면 내 딸을 정말로 주마.”라고 말했어요.
한스는 즉시 출발했지요. 곧장 쭉 나아가며 걸었답니다.
저녁 무렵 어느 성에 도착해 “여기서 하룻밤만 묵을 수 있나요?”라고 물어보았지요. 왜냐면 그때 당시엔 여관이 하나도 없었거든요.
성주(성의 주인)가 “그리하겠네. 그런데 자넨 어딜 그렇게 가는 길인가?”라고 물었어요.
한스가 대답했어요.
“그리핀에게 가는 길이에요.”
“오! 그 그리핀! 모르는 게 없다는 그 그리핀 말이지. 그럼 가는 김에 물어봐주게. 내가 막 철제 금고 열쇠를 잃어버렸는데 도통 찾을 수가 있어야 말이지. 그게 어디 있나 자네가 물어봐주면 좋겠군.”
“네, 정말,”라고 한스가 말했어요. “기꺼이 그렇게 할게요.”
다음날 새벽 일찍 그가 계속 길을 걸어 밤이 될 무렵 또 다른 성에 도착했어요.
거기 사는 사람들도 꼭 이 청년이 그리핀에게 간다는 걸 알게 되어 말했지요.
“어느 집에 아픈 딸이 하나 있는데 무슨 약을 써 봐도 낫게 할 수가 없었다네, 혹시 그 애가 다시 건강을 회복할 수 있는 방법이 있나하고 자네가 그리핀에게 물어봐주겠나?”
한스가 “기꺼이 그리해드리지요.”라고 말하곤 계속 나아갔어요.
그가 호수에 도착해보니 나룻배 대신 키가 크고 엄청 큰 어떤 남자가 거기 있다 사람들을 호수 건너편으로 날라다주고 있었어요.
그 남자가 한스에게 “어디로 여행가슈?”라고 물었어요.
“그리핀에게요.”라고 한스가 말했지요.
“그렇담, 거기 가면,”라고 그 남자가 말했어요. “내가 왜 이 호수에서 모든 사람들을 건너다주고 있어야하는지 좀 물어봐주시오.”
“네, 정말 기꺼이 그리해드리지요.”라고 한스가 말했어요.
그런 다음 그 남자가 한스를 어께에 메더니 호수 건너편으로 건너다주었어요.
마침내 한스가 그리핀의 집에 도착을 하였답니다.
하지만 집엔 그의 아내만 있고, 그리핀 자신은 없었어요.
그때 아내가 한스에게 “뭘 바라시나요?”라고 물었지요.
그런 까닭에 한스가 모든 걸 그녀에게 말해주었어요… 자신이 그리핀의 꼬리에서 깃털 하나를 얻어야한다는 애기와, 금고 열쇠를 잃은 성이 있는데 그 열쇠가 어디 있나 그리핀에게 물어봐 달라 부탁을 받은 얘기며…, 아픈 딸을 둔 또 다른 성 이야기와 그녀를 낮게 해줄 방법이 있는지 물어봐주기로 했다는 얘기… 그리고 여기서 멀지 않은 호수에 한 남자가 있던데 그 남자가 사람들을 호수 건너편으로 날라다주고 있었는데 자신이 왜 그 일을 해야 하는지 좀 그리핀에게 간절히 좀 물어봐 달라 청하더라는 애기들을 한스가 그녀에게 해주었지요.
그러자 아내가 말했어요.
“여기 누가 있는지 아시고 오신 거예요, 착한 양반, 기독교도는 누구도 그리핀에게 말을 건넬 수가 없어요. 즉시 잡아먹히거든요. 다만 당신이 좋으시다면 그이의 침대 밑에 들어가 계셔보세요, 그럼 밤에 그이가 깊이 잠들었을 때 당신이 손을 뻗어 그이의 꼬리에서 깃털을 하나 뽑을 수 있을 거예요, 그리고 당신이 궁금해하는 질문들은 제가 따로 그이에게 물어볼게요.”
한스는 그 제안이 무척 마음에 들었어요. 그래서 침대 밑으로 들어갔지요.
저녁이 죄다 그리핀이 집으로 돌아왔어요, 그는 방에 들어서자마자 말했어요.
“여보, 기독교인의 냄새가 나는데.”
“네,”라며 아내가 말했어요. “오늘 한 명 왔다 갔어요.”
그러자 그리핀이 더는 묻지 않았어요.
한밤중 그리핀이 큰소리로 코를 드르렁 골 때, 한스가 손을 내밀어 그의 꼬리에서 깃털 하나를 뽑아당겼어요.
순간 그리핀이 벌떡 깨어나며 말했어요.
“마누라, 기독교인의 냄새가 나, 누군가 내 꼬리를 잡아당긴 거 같다고.”
그의 아내가 말했어요.
“꿈인 게 확실하네요, 기독교인이 한 명 오늘 여기에 들렀다 말했지만 그는 이미 떠난 걸요. 그러고 보니 그가 제게 금고 열쇠를 잃어버린 성이 있는데 도무지 찾을 수가 없더라는 얘기를 하던걸요.”
“오! 바보멍충이들!”라며 그리핀이 말했어요. “그 열쇠는 ‘재목(건축용 나무)창고’ 문 뒤에 있는 통나무 아래에 놓여 있는데 말이야.”
“그리고 그가 또 말하길, 아픈 딸을 둔 또 다른 성이 하나 있는데 사람들이 도무지 그녀를 고칠 방법을 몰라하고 있데요.”
“원! 저런 멍청이들!”라며 그리핀이 말했어요. “지하실 계단 아래에 있는 두꺼비 한 마리가 그녀의 머리카락으로 둥지(집)를 만들어서 그렇게 된 일인데, 그녀가 자신의 머리카락들만 도로 되찾는다면 금방 나을 거야.”
“그리고 또 그가 말하길, 호수가 하나 있는데 거기 있는 어떤 남자가 사람들을 호수 건너편으로 날라다주는 걸 강요당하고 있다는 군요.”
“원, 그런 등신을 봤다!”라며 그리핀이 말했어요. “누구든 한 명만 호수 한 가운데에 그냥 내려놓음 아무도 다신 건너게 해 달라 말해오지 않을 텐데 말이야.”
다음날 아침 일찍 그리핀은 일어나 외출을 했어요.
그런 다음 한스도 침대에서 기어 나왔지요, 물론 아름다운 깃털 하나를 챙기는 건 절대 잊지 않았답니다.그리고 그리핀이 말한 열쇠며, 딸이며, 나룻배 사공 얘기도 죄다 들어놓은 상태였지요.
그리핀 아내는 혹시 몰라 모든 걸 한 번 더 반복해 말해주었답니다. 혹시나 한스가 까먹을 수 있으니까요. 그런 다음 한스가 다시 집으로 출발했지요.
우선 그는 호수에 있는 그 남자에게로 갔어요. 
그 남자가 말했어요.
“그래 내가 좀 물어봐 달란 건 물어보셨소?”
한스가 대꾸했어요.
“먼저 저를 건너편으로 옮겨다주시면 그때 말씀드릴게요.”
남자가 한스를 호수 건너편으로 날라다주었어요. 그(나룻배 사공)가 일을 마치자, 한스가 말했어요.
“누구든 한 사람을 호수 한 가운데에 그냥 내려둬 버리세요. 그럼 아무도 다신 건너게 해달라 말해오지 않을 거예요.”
남자는 그 대답이 엄청나게 기뻐 한스에게 말했어요.
“내 기꺼이 자넬 건너편으로 다시 한 번 더 날라다 다시 여기까지 와주겠네.” 
하지만 한스는 “아뇨.”라고 대답하는 선에서 골머리 앓을 일을 떨쳐버렸죠.
어쨌든 만족한 한스가 계속 길을 나아갔어요.
그런 다음 그는 아픈 딸을 둔 그 성에 도착했어요.
한스는, 걸을 수도 없는 그 딸을 어깨 위에 태우고서 지하실 계단 아래로 데리고 가 가장 아래에 있던 계단 밑에서 두꺼비 둥지(집)를 옆으로 빼내 그녀의 손에 쥐어주었어요, 그 즉시 그녀가 한스의 어깨에서 뛰어내리며 한스보다 먼저 계단을 밟고 올라갔지요, 완전히 병이 완쾌된 거였어요.
그리되니 그녀의 아빠 엄마도 기쁨이 상상 이상이셔서 금과 은을 선물로 한스에게 주며 한스가 원하는 건 뭐든지 쥐어주었답니다. 
또 다른 성에 도착한 한스는 즉시 ‘재목(건축용 나무) 창고’로 가 문 뒤에 있는 통나무 밑에서 그 열쇠를 찾아 성주(성의 주인)에게 건네주었답니다.
성주 또한 기쁨이 작을 리 없어 금고에 있던 많은 금을 보답으로 한스에게 주었죠. 어디 성주가 내준 게 그 뿐인가요, 각종 보석들과 암소들 그리고 양과 염소들을 선물로 한스에게 주었답니다.
한스가 왕 앞에 도착했을 땐 이 모든 선물들… 즉 돈이여, 금이며, 은 그리고 암소들과 양과 염소들이 너무도 많았던 지라 왕이 눈이 휘둥그레지며 “이게 다 어디서 난 게냐?”라고 묻기에 이르렀지요.  
그때 한스가 말했어요.
“그리핀이 준 거에요, 뭐든 원하는 대로 주든 걸요.”
그래서 왕은 속으로 생각했어요.
‘그 참 괜찮군, 다른 유용한 것들도 얻을 수 있겠어.’
왕은 그리핀을 찾아나섰답니다.
하지만 호수에 도착했을 땐, 우연히도 한스 다음에 도착한 이가 바로 왕이었던지라, 그 남자가 왕을 호수 한가운데에 내려둬 버리고 떠나버렸어요.
그 바람에 왕은 물에 빠져 죽고 말았어요.
하지만 한스는 공주님과 결혼해 왕이 될 수 있었답니다. 
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「괴물새 그리핀」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「괴물새 그리핀」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter166.html  

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



167. 힘센 한스



옛날 옛적에 한 아이를 둔 남편과 아내가 살고 있었어요. 아주 외진 골짜기에서 그들만 살았더랬죠.
그러다 한번은 엄마가 어린 ‘한스’(독일 사람이란 뜻임)를 데리고 전나무 가지들을 주우려 숲으로 나가셨지요. 그때가 그러니까 한스가 두 살배기였을 때예요.
봄철이라 핀 다채로운 꽃들을… 보고 아가는 많이 기뻐했더랬죠, 그래서 엄마는 한스를 데리고 더 숲 속으로 들어가 보았답니다.
그때 별안간 두 산적들이 울창한 수풀에서 튀어나오더니 엄마와 아이를 붙잡아 깜깜한 숲속 저 멀리로 끌고 가버렸어요. 한번 들어가면 나올 수 없는 깊은 숲으로 말이죠.
가련한 여인은 산적들에게 자신과 아이를 풀어 달라 사정사정해보았지만, 돌처럼 매정한 산적들은 그녀의 기도와 탄원을 들은 척도 하지 않았어요. 도리어 더 거칠게 숲으로 끌고갈 뿐이었죠.
그렇게 수풀들과 가시덤불들 사이로 3킬로미터나 더 들어가니, 문이 하나 나 있는 바위가 나왔어요.
산적들이 똑똑 노크를 하니 즉시 문이 열렸어요.
길고 어두운 통로를 지나 마침내 큰 동굴로 들어서니 난로 불이 사방을 밝히고 있었지요.
벽엔 검들과 ‘기병도’(기병이 사용하는 검)와 다른 무시무시한 무기들이 불빛을 반사하며 으름장을 놓고 있었어요.
한가운데에 있던 검은 식탁에 네 명의 다른 산적들이 노○(돈을 걸고 하는 거)을 하고 있었어요.
맨 윗자리에 두목이 앉아 있었죠.
여자가 들어오는 것을 본 두목이 다가와 말했어요.
“편히 있으슈, 두려워 말고, 해치지 않을 거유, 단 이제부터 집안일을 좀 해주시구려. 정리만 잘해준다면 크게 해코지 당할 일을 없을 게유.”
그런 까닭에 그들이 그녀에게 먹을 것을 좀 주며, 아이와 함께 잘 침대도 보여주었지요.
그리하여 여자는 산적들과 수년을 함께 머무르게 되었지요, 그리고 한스는 무럭무럭 자라 키도 커고 강해졌어요.
엄마는 그에게 얘기도 들려주고, 동굴에서 찾은, 기사들이 나오는 낡은 동화책들로 읽는 법도 가르쳐주었답니다.
한스는 아홉 살이 되었을 때, 혼자서 전나무 가지를 하나 꺾어 강력한 몽둥이를 하나 만들더니 침대 뒤에 숨기곤, 엄마에게 가 말했어요.
“사랑하는 엄마, 누가 제 아빠인지 말해주세요, 알고 싶고 꼬 알아야겠어요.” 
엄마는 아무런 말도 하지 않았답니다. 아이가 향수병에 걸릴까봐 그랬죠. 더구나 산적들이 그를 놓아줄 리가 없었거든요. 하지만 아이가 아빠를 못 만나는 걸 생각하니 엄마 마음은 무너졌답니다.
밤에 산적들이 약탈 물들을 가지고 돌아와서요.
한스는 자신의 몽둥이를 꺼내들고 두목 앞으로 나아가 말했어요.
“누가 내 아빠요, 이젠 알아야겠소, 말하지 않음 내가 당신들을 때려눕힐 테요.”
그때 두목이 껄껄 웃더니 한스의 귀방망이를 한 대 후려갈겼죠, 그 바람에 한스가 식탁 아래로 데굴데굴 굴렀답니다.
다시 일어선 한스는 입을 꾹 다물고 생각했지요.
“1년 더 기다려보고 다시 해보자, 아마 그땐 지금보다 상황이 더 낫겠지.” 
1년이 지나가고, 그가 다시 자신의 몽둥이를 꺼내 먼지를 툭툭 튼 다음 감탄하며 말했어요.
“역시나 강력한 몽둥이야.”
밤에 산적들이 돌아와 차례로 포도주를 마셔댔고 고개가 축축 쳐지기 시작했지요.
그때 한스가 자신의 몽둥이를 꺼내 두목 앞에 나서며 “누가 내 아빠요?”라고 물었어요.
하지만 두목은 이번에도 사정없이 한스의 귀방망이를 후려갈겼고, 한스는 식탁 밑으로 데굴데굴 굴렀지요.
하지만 1년 전과는 달리 한스가 금방 다시 일어나더니 두목과 산적들을 자신의 몽둥이로 인정사정없이 때리기 시작했어요. 그 바람에 산적들이 팔이건 다리건 더는 꿈쩍도 못하고 말았답니다.
엄마는 아들의 용기와 강함에 탄복하며 구석에 서 있었답니다.
한스가 일을 다 치른 다음 엄마에게 가 말했어요.
“이제 제 스스로를 증명했으니 누가 제 아빤지 알아야겠어요, 지금 당장.”
“사랑하는 한스야,”라며 엄마가 대답했어요. “가자, 우리 아빠를 찾아가 보자구나.”
그녀가 두목에게서 출입구 열쇠를 찾아냈어요. 그리고 한스는 큰 포대자루를 가져와 금이건 은이건 눈에 띄는 대로 아름다운 건 죄다 포대자루가 가득 찰 때까지 쓸어 담았지요. 그런 다음 그가 포대자루를 등에 짊어졌어요.
그들이 어두운 동굴에서 나오는데, 생전처음 보는 대낮의 밝음과 푸르른 숲과 꽃 그리고 새들과 하늘에 비치는 아침 햇살이 어찌나 눈부신지 한스의 두 눈이 휘둥그레졌답니다.
그는 그렇게 모든 것들을 경이로운 시선으로 바라보며 서 있었지요.
결국 엄마가 집으로 가는 길을 찾아냈어요.
그들은 두 세 시간 정도를 걸어 외진 골짜기 속에 있는 자신들의 작은 집에 도착하였답니다.
아빠가 출입구에 앉아 있었어요.
아빠는 아내를 알아보고 아내에게서 “이 얘가 아들이에요.”라는 말을 전해듣고는 기쁨의 눈을을 흘렸답니다. 왜냐면 아빠는 그들이 예전에 죽은 줄로만 알았거든요.
한스는 비록 이제 12살밖에 안 되었지만 아빠보다 키가 머리 하나만큼 더 컸답니다.
그들은 함께 자그마한 방 안으로 들어갔지요. 하지만 한스가 등에 이고 있던 포대자루를 난로 옆 긴 의자 위에 내려놓자마자 온 집이 우두둑 금이 가는 소리가 나더니 긴 의자가 와장창 부서지며 바닥까지 툭하고 꺼지고 말아, 무거운 포대자루가 지하실까지 떨어지고 말았답니다.
“주여!”라며 아빠가 소리쳤어요. “이게 다 무슨 일이람? 우리 작은 집이 산산조각 다 부서지지 않았니!”
“걱정 마요, 사랑하는 아빠,”라며 한스가 대답했어요. “여기, 이 포대자루 속에는, 새집을 짓고도 남을 만큼 돈이 많이 들었으니까요.”
아빠와 한스는 즉시 새 집을 짓기 시작했어요, 그리고 가축과 땅도 사들이고, 사육장(가축을 키우는 곳)도 하나 만들었지요.
한스가 밭을 갈 때면, 자기 힘으로 직접 땅을 쟁기를 끌었기에, 굳이 수소가 필요가 없었지요.
봄이 다시 찾아오자, 한스가 말했어요.
“아부지, 돈은 다 가지시고, 제겐 그냥 50킬로그램짜리 방망이 하나만 만들어주세요, 그럼 그걸 가지고 세상… 여행을 나서볼게요.”
소원하던 방망이가 다 만들어지자, 한스는 아빠 집을 떠나 세상을 향해 깊게 깊게 나아갔답니다. 그러다 울창한 숲에 도착했지요.
그때 무엇인가가 “우두둑 찍찍” 하는 소리가 주위에서 들려왔어요.
그가 보니 전나무 하나가 마치 새끼줄처럼 바닥에서부터 꼭대기까지 비비 꼬아져있지 뭐예요. 그가 위쪽을 바라보니 한 덩치 큰 친구가 그 나무를 부여잡고는 마치 버드나무 지팡이마냥 ‘꼬고’(비틀고) 있지 뭐예요.
“어이!”라며 한스가 소리쳤어요. “거기서 뭐하는감?”
그 친구가 대꾸했어요. “어제 해놓은 나무들로 새끼줄을 ‘꼬고’(서로 비틀어 만들고) 있네.”
‘그 마음에 드는데,’라며 한스가 생각했어요. ‘참 힘센 친구야.’
그가 그를 다시 부르더니 말했어요. “그건 그냥 두고 나랑 같이 가세나.”
그 친구가 내려왔어요. 그는 한스보다 머리통 하나만큼이나 더 키가 컸답니다. 한스도 작은 키가 아닌데 말이죠.
“이제부터 자네 이름은 ‘전나무로 새끼(새끼줄) 꼬는 자’일세.”라며 한스가 그에게 말했어요.
그 후 그들이 좀 더 숲속으로 들어가 보니 뭔가를 툭툭 두드리며 땅도 산산조각 낼만큼 강력한 힘으로 해머질을 하고 있는 게 들렸어요.
그 후 얼마 안돼서 그들이 거대한 바위 하나에 도착했는데, 그 앞에서 어떤 거인이 떡하니 버티고 서선 자신의 주먹으로 바위를 때리며 박살을 내고 있던 중이었어요.
한스는 “아니 대체 뭐하시는 게요?”라고 물었어요.
그가 대답했지요.
“밤에, 잘 때, 곰들이나, 늑대들, 그 밖의 해로운 동물들이 코를 킁킁거리며 내 냄새를 맡고 찾아오지 못하게 쉴 집을 짓고 있던 참이오.” 
‘오, 정말,’라며 한스가 생각했어요. ‘이 친구도 써먹을 데가 있겠어.’
그래서 그에게 제안했지요.
“자네 집 짓는 건 나두고, 나랑 같이 가세나. 이제부터 자네를 ‘돌… 깨부수는 자’라고 부르겠네.”
그 남자도 선뜻 동의했어요.
그래서 그들 셋은 숲을 이리저리 돌아다녔답니다. 그들이 어딜 가든 들짐승들은 겁을 집어먹고 달아나기 바빴지요.
저녁이 되어 그들은 오래돼 버려진 성에 도착했어요. 그들은 그 안으로 들어가 홀(큰 공간)에 잠자리를 마련하고 드러누웠죠.
다음날 아침 한스는 정원으로 나가보았어요.
가시나무들과 수풀들이 온통 제멋대로 자라고 있었어요. 
그가 그렇게 주변을 둘러보고 있는데 난데없이 야생 멧돼지 한 마리가 돌진해왔어요. 하지만 한스가 자신의 방망이로 한 방 제대로 날려버렸더니 멧돼지가 곧바로 뻗어버렸답니다.  
그는 어깨에 멧돼지를 짊어 메고 안으로 들어와 쇠꼬챙이에 꽂고 구운 다음 다함께 맛좋게 먹었답니다.
그런 다음 그들은 매일 번갈아가며 두 명은 나가서 사냥을 하고 한 명은 집에 머물며 각자가 먹을 4킬로그램의 고기를 요리해놓기로 했지요.
첫째 날엔 ‘전나무로 새끼(새끼줄) 꼬는 자’가 집에 머물고, 한스와 ‘돌 깨부수는 자’가 사냥을 나갔답니다.
‘전나무로 새끼 꼬는 자’가 바삐 요리를 하고 있는데, 주름살이 깊게 벤 나이 많은 난쟁이가 성안으로 들어오더니 고기를 좀 달라고 요구해왔어요.
“꺼져, 이 교활한 위선자야,”라며 그가 대답했지요. “너 줄 고기가 어디 있어.”
하지만 이 작고 시답잖은 난쟁이가 그에게 달려들며 주먹질을 해왔을 때는 ‘전나무로 새끼 꼬는 자’도 깜짝 놀라고 말았답니다. 도저히 당해낼 수가 없어 ‘전나무로 새끼 꼬는 자’는 땅바닥위에 뻗은 채 숨만 간신히 쉬고 있었거든요!
난쟁이는 그를 상대로 완전히 분풀이를 하고서야 가버렸답니다.
다른 두 사람이 사냥에서 돌아왔을 때, ‘전나무로 새끼 꼬는 자’는 자신을 두들겨 팬 그 늙은 난쟁이에 대해선 한마디도 하지 않았어요.
그가 생각했지요.
‘저들도 집에 있다, 그 작은 수세미 놈과 한 판 떠봐야해.’
생각만 했는데도 그는 벌써 기뻤답니다.
다음날 ‘돌 깨부수는 자’가 집에 머물다가 ‘전나무로 새끼 꼬는 자’가 어제 겪었던 일을 경험하고 말았답니다. 그도 고기 한 점을 안 주려다가 그만 그 난쟁이에게 호되게 당하고 말았던 거예요.
저녁이 되어 다른 두 사람이 집에 돌아왔을 때, ‘전나무로 새끼 꼬는 자’는 ‘돌 깨부수는 자’도 당한 걸 쉽게 눈치 챌 수 있었죠. 
하지만 둘 다 입을 다물곤 생각했어요.
‘한스도 그 주먹맛을 봐야해.’
다음날 한스가 집에 머무는 날이 되어 그가 부엌에서 할 일들을 하며 프라이팬에서 쇠똥을 제거하며 서 있는데, 그 난쟁이가 오더니 다짜고짜 고기 한 점을 내놓으라고 요구했어요.
그때 한스가 생각했지요.
‘불쌍하니, 내 몫을 좀 나눠줘야겠군, 그럼 다른 사람의 몫은 줄지 않을 테니까.’
그가 고기 한 점을 건네주었어요.
난쟁이가 순식간에 먹어치우더니 “더 달라”고 다시 요구해왔어요.
성품이 고운 한스가 좀 더 주며 말했지요.
“이게 가장 맛있는 부위야, 그러니 이거 먹고 만족하렴.”
하지만 난쟁이는 세 번째로 재차 더 달라 요구했어요.
“저런 뻔뻔한 녀석!”라며 한스가 말하며 하나도 주지 않았어요.
그러자 심술궂은 난쟁이가 그에게 달려들며 ‘전나무로… 새끼 꼬는 자’와 ‘돌… 깨부수는 자’에게 했듯 주먹질을 해댔어요. 하지만 그 난쟁이는 이번만은 임자 잘못 만난 거였죠.
한스가 굳이 온힘을 다하지 않고도 두 서너 방 먹였더니 난쟁이가 계단 저 아래로 나가떨어지고 말았거든요.
한스가 막 뒤쫓아 가려다 자신의 키가 너무 커 멈칫했지요, 잘못하면 계단에서 굴러떨어지니ㄲㆍ요.
그 바람에 난쟁이가 다시 일어났을 때엔 도망칠 여유가 생겼답니다.
한스는 그럼에도 불구하고 숲 아주 깊숙이까지 난쟁이를 뒤쫓아 갔어요, 그때 난쟁이가 바위 속 구멍 안으로 쏙 미끄러져 들어가는 게 보이지 뭐예요.
한스는 이제 집에 돌아왔지요. 하지만 표시를 해두고 오는 걸 잊이 않았답니다.
다른 두 사람이 돌아왔을 때 그들은 한스가 멀쩡한 것을 보고 깜짝놀랐어요.
무슨 일이 있었나를 한스가 그들에게 말해주었죠. 그래서 그들도 자신들이 당한 사실을 더는 숨기지 않았답니다.
한스는 “껄껄걸” 웃으며 말했어요.
“당해도 싸다, 그래 고기가 아까웠던 거야? 너희들 같이 이렇게 큰 애들이 그깟 난쟁이하나 당해내지 못해 얻어맞다니.”
그런 까닭에 그들이 바구니와 새끼줄을 챙겨서, 난쟁이가 미끄러져 들어갔던 바위 속 구멍으로 가보았지요.
그들은 우선 바구니에 한스와 한스의 방망이를 넣고 아래로 내렸어요.
한스가 바닥에 도착해보니 문이 하나 나왔는데 그 문을 열고 들어가니 그림만큼이나 사랑스러운 아가씨가 앉아 있지 뭐예요, 정말이지 이루 말로 다 표현할 수 없을 만큼 아리따운 처녀였어요. 바로 그 옆에는 그 난쟁이가 앉아 있다 바다표범 같은 한스를 향해 씩 이빨을 드러내며 웃는 거예요!
하지만 아가씨는 쇠사슬에 꽁꽁 묶여 있었고 슬픔을 자아내는 시선으로 한스를 바라봤기에, 한스는 그녀에게 무한 동정심을 느끼고 생각했어요.
‘사악한 난쟁이로부터 뭔 수를 쓰서라도 저 아가씨를 구해내야겠다.’
그리하여 한스가 자신의 방망이를 한방 세게 휘둘렀고 난쟁이가 죽어 쓰러지고 말았죠. 
그 즉시 쇠사슬들이 아가씨에게서 흘러내렸어요.
한스가 그녀의 미모에 흠뻑 취한 건 말할 필요도 없었지요.
그녀가 말했어요.
“저는 공주랍니다. 제가 결혼에 동의해주지 않았다는 이유로, 어느 야만스런 백작이 집에 있던 저를 납치해 이 바위 사이에 가두고 이 난쟁이를 시켜 지키게 했지요. 그래서 저는 비참함과 고통을 참아야만 했어요.”
이제 한스가 그 아가씨를 바구니에 태워 위에서 끌어올리게 했답니다.
바구니가 다시 내려왔아요. 하지만 한스는 두 동료를 신뢰할 수가 없었죠.
한스가 생각했어요.
‘저들은 벌써 내게 거짓말을 했어, 난쟁이에 관한 얘기를 내게 안 말했었잖아, 이제와 저들이 내게 어찌 나올지 알고?’
그래서 한스는 바구니에 자신의 방망이를 넣었지요, 정말 운이 좋았어요, 왜냐면 바구니가 반쯤 올라갔을 때 뚝하고 다시 떨어졌거든요. 만에 하나 한스가 타고 있었다면 틀림없이 떨어져 죽고 말았을 거예요.
하지만 그건 그거고 이건 이거고, 도대체 이 깊은 땅 밑에서 어떻게 다시 지상으로 돌아간단 말인가요, 그래서 그가 돌아서 빠져나갈 틈이라도 있는지 살펴보기로 결심했어요.
“정말 최악인데,”라며 그가 혼잣말로 말했어요. “이러다 세월 다 보내겠어.”
그가 앞뒤로 걷다, 아가씨가 앉아 있던 그 작은 방으로 다시 들어가 보았더니, 난장이가 손가락에 끼고 있던 반지 하나가 번득이고 있는 게 아니겠어요.
그래서 한스가 그걸 빼내 자신의 손가락에 끼운 다음 돌려보았더니, 순간 머리 위에 뭔가가 빙빙 도는 소리가 나는 거예요.
그가 올려다보니 허공에 요정들이 맴돌고 있다, “주인님 무슨 분부라고 있으신가요?”라고 말하지 않겠어요.
한스는 순간 말문이 막혀 멍하니 있다 곧 “그럼 나를 지상으로 다시 데려다줘.”라고 말했지요.
요정들이 즉시 그 말을 따랐고, 한스는 자신이 위로 나는 듯한 느낌을 받았죠.
하지만 그가 다시 위로 올라왔을 땐 아무도 없었어요.
‘전나무로 새끼 꼬는 자’와 ‘돌 깨부수는 자’가 아름다운 아가씨를 데리고 서둘러 떠나버렸던 거지요. 
하지만 한스는 반지를 돌려 그들이 어디로 갔는지 요정들에게 물었어요. 
“그들은 바다 위에 있어요.”  
한스는 한 번도 쉬지 않고 달리고 또 달려 마침내 해안가에 도착했어요.
거기서 보니 바다 저 멀리, 멀리에 신의 없는 자신의 동료들이 작은 배에 앉아 있는 게 보였어요.
순간 ‘빡이 돈’(무척 화가 난) 한스가 자신이 무얼 하려는지도 모른 채 성큼 앞으로 내딛다 그만 손에 무거운(50킬로그램) 방망이를 쥔 채 물 속에 풍덩 빠지고 말아, 헤엄을 치기 시작했지만 50킬로그램짜리 방망이 때문에 점점 물속으로 가라앉아 잘못하다간 물에 빠져 죽게 생겼어요.
그 위기일발의 순간에 그가 반지를 돌리는데 성공했어요, 그 즉시 허공에 요정들이 나타나 그를 붙들고서 마치 제비처럼 가볍게 그 배에다 내려다주었어요.
한스가 자신의 방망이를 휘둘러 사악한 동료들에게 마땅한 응보(죄 값)를 치르게 하곤 그들을 물속에 처박아버렸어요.
그런 다음 그는 아름다운 아가씨와 항해를 했답니다. 물론 아가씨가 무척이나 놀란 상태였긴 했지만요.
그는 두 번씩이나 구한 그녀를 그녀의 아빠 엄마가 계신 집으로 데려다주었지요. 
거기서 그는 그녀와 결혼식을 올렸고, 그래서 모두들 대단히 기뻐하였답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「힘센 한스」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「힘센 한스」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter167.html  

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



168. 천국에 간 농부



옛날 옛적에 비록 가난하지만 신앙심이 깊던 농부가 죽어, 천국의 문 앞에 도착했어요.
그와 동시에 아주 살찌고 부자였던 ‘영주’(땅의 주인) 또한 거기 도착해 천국에 들어가길 소망하고 있었지요.
그런 다음 성 베드로께서 열쇠를 가지고 오시더니 문을 열고 그 ‘권세자’(영주)를 안으로 들여보내주었어요.
하지만 성 베드로께서는 농부는 언뜻 못 보신 듯 문을 그냥 다시 닫아버리셨지요.
그리하여 농부가 밖에 서 있는데, 천국 안에서 방금 들어갔던 권세자를 맞이하는 온갖 종류의 환호성들과 음악과 노래 소리가 한가득 들리지 뭐예요.
마침내 소란도 다시 잠잠해지자, 성 베드로께서 다시 오시더니 천국의 문을 열고 그 농부도 안으로 들여보내주었어요.
자신이 들어갈 때도 아까 그 부자와 마찬가지로 음악과 노래 소리가 있을 거라 기대했던 농부였지만, 막상 들어가 보니 천국 안은 그냥 너무도 차분하고 조용한 거예요.
물론 그 농부도 애정이 듬뿍 담긴 마중을 받긴 받았어요, 천사들이 나와 그를 맞이해주었으니까요. 하지만 아무도 노래는 부르지 않았지요.
그래서 그 농부가 성 베드로에게 “왜 부자가 들어올 때 해주었듯, 제게도 노래를 불러주시지 않는 건가요? 애정이 치우침은 지상에서나 천국에서나 똑같은 거 같아요.”라고 여쭈었어요.
그러자 성 베드로께서 말씀하시길,
“아닐세, 자네도 어느 누구 못지않게 우리들이 사랑한다네. 다만 부자가 천국에 오는 경우는 백년에 한 번 있을까 말까 한데 방금 그 부자가 그 경우였다네, 하지만 자네같이 가난한 자가 천국에 오는 경우는 늘 상 있는 일이란 말이지!”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「천국에 간 농부」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「천국에 간 농부」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter168.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



169. 말라깽이 리제



말라깽이 리제(이 동화의 등장인물 이름들은 1840년판 독일어원본대로 해석했음)는 게으른 하인츠와 뚱뚱한 트리네와 사고방식이 판이하게 달랐답니다. 허튼 생각을 용납하지 않았죠.
그녀는 아침부터 저녁까지 재(비누?)로 모든 걸 박박 문질러 닦았으며, 자신의 남편인 키다리 렌츠에겐 자루 세 개를 인 당나귀보다 더 무거운 짐을 지고 가게 괴롭혔죠.
하지만 다 소용없었어요, 그들 부부는 아무 것도 없었고, 그리고 아무 것도 얻지 못했죠.
저녁 침대에 누울 때면 그녀는 정말 온 몸이 쑤셔오는 가운데서도 생각의 나래를 펼쳤답니다.
그녀가 자신의 팔꿈치들로 남편의 옆구리를 쿡쿡 찌르며 말했어요.
“들어봐, 렌츠, 내가 생각을 해봤는데 말이야, 내가 은화 하나를 발견하고, 누가 내게 하나를 주고, 그리고 또 하나는 빌리고, 그리고 당신이 내게 은화를 하나 주면, 그럼 모두 합쳐 은화 네 개잖아. 그럼 우리 그걸로 어린 암소를 사자.”
이 제안이 남편의 마음에 들었어요.
“좋다만,”라며 그가 말했어요. “당신이 선물로 받길 바라는 그 은화를 내가 어디서 구한담. 하지만 당신이 그 돈만 다 모은다면야, 젖소를 사라고, 잘 실행해봐, 내게도 좋을 테니.”라며 그가 덧붙였어요. “만약 암소가 송아지를 낳으면, 나도 종종 우유를 한 잔씩 마시고 기력을 회복할 수 있을 거잖아.”
“그 우유는 당신께 아니지.”라며 여자가 말했어요. “우리 송아지보고 빨아먹게 해야지, 그래야 쑥쑥 자라 크고 통통해질 거 아냐, 그래야 우리도 그 애를 좋은 값에 팔 수 있을 거고.”
“그렇지만,”라며 남자가 대꾸했어요. “우리가 조금 마셔서 나쁠 건 없다고.”
“당신은 낙농업(농사)을 누구한테 배운 거야?”라며 여자가 말했어요. “해가 되든 안 되든, 내가 그걸 허락지 않을 거라고, 당신이 고개를 내밀고 있어도 우유 한 방울 못 마시게 해줄 테니까 그리 알아! 내가 힘들 게 이룬 걸로 꿀꺽 자기 배를 채우려는 거야?”
“아니, 이 마누라가,”라며 남자가 말했어요. “입 좀 다물지 못해, 안 그럼 그 주둥이에 한 방 맞을 줄 알아!”
“뭐야!”라며 그녀가 외쳤어요. “지금 나를 협박하는 거야, 이 먹보에, 불한당에, 게으른 미련탱이 같은 게!”
그녀가 막 남편의 머리카락을 움켜쥐려하자, 키다리 렌츠도 참지 않고 벌떡 일어나 말라깽이 리제의 야윈 두 팔을 한 손으로 움켜쥐곤 다른 손으론 베개를 집어 그녀의 머리를 내리누르고는, 아내가 잔소리를 하게 내버려뒀어요, 그리고 그녀가 아주 지쳐 잠이 들 때까지 그렇게 베개로 그녀를 누르고 있었답니다.
다음날 아침 그녀가 깨어났을 때 그들의 부부싸움이 계속 되었는지, 아니면 그녀가 그토록 바라던 은화를 정말 구하러 밖으로 나갔는지 여부는, 저는 모른답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「말라깽이 리제」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「말라깽이 리제」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter169.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



170. 숲 속의 오두막집



외딴 숲 외곽에서 아내와 세 딸과 함께 작은 오두막집에서 사는 가난한 나무꾼이 한 명 있었어요.
어느 날 아침 그가 막 일을 나가려다 아내에게 말했지요.
“큰 딸을 시켜 점심을 숲으로 가져오게 해, 안 그럼 내가 일을 못 끝내, 애가 길을 잃지 않도록,”라며 그가 덧붙였어요. “기장(기장=잡곡밥. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/bFDQa1 ) 한 봉지를 가지고 가 길에 뿌려놓을게.”
그리하여 해가 하늘 한복판에 떴을 때, 스프 한 그릇을 가지고 소녀가 길을 나서게 되었지요.
하지만 멧새(참새)들과, 참-새들과, 종달새들과 핀치새들, 그리고 지빠귀들과 검은방울새들이 이미 기장을 삭다 쪼아 먹고 난 이후였지요. 그래서 소녀는 길을 찾을 수 없었답니다.
운에 맡기기로 하고서 소녀가 계속 걸어가 보니 해는 이미 저물고 밤은 사방에 드리웠지요.
밤이 되니 나무들이 바스락거리는 소리가 예사롭지 않고, 올빼미들이 부엉부엉 울어, 소녀는 너무도 무서웠답니다.
그때 저 멀리서 불빛 하나가 보이는 거 같더니 나무들 사이로 깜빡였어요.
‘저기 누가 사나봐, 하룻밤 재워 달래야지.’라며 소녀가 생각하고서 그 불빛 쪽으로 갔어요.
머지않아 그녀는 창가들로 빛이 새어나오는 집에 도착했답니다.
그녀가 똑똑 노크를 하자 안에서 거친 목소리가 울려왔어요.
“들어오거라.”
소녀는 어두운 현관으로 들어가 방문을 두드렸지요. 
“그냥 들어와도 된다.”라며 목소리가 말했어요.
그녀가 문을 열고 들어가니, 머리가 온통 회색인 노인이 한 분이 식탁에 앉아 있었어요. 두 손으로 자신의 얼굴을 받쳐 든 채 말이죠. 그의 흰 수염은 어찌나 긴지 식탁위에 죄다 흘러넘쳐 바닥에까지 닿아있었지요.
난로 옆에는 세 마리 동물들이 누워있었어요, 암탉, 수탉, 그리고 얼룩빼기 암소였지요.
소녀가 노인께 자초지종을 말씀드리고 하룻밤만 재워 달라 부탁드렸어요.
남자가 말했어요.
“예쁜 암탉아, 귀여운 수탉아, 이쁜 얼룩빼기 암소야, 너희들의 생각은 어떠니?”
“둑스,”(← 동물의 말을 소리 나는 대로 발음한 거)라며 동물들이 대답했어요. 그건 “기꺼이요.”라는 의미였어요. 왜냐면 노인이 다음과 같이 말했거든요.
“좋다, 재워주고 먹여주겠다, 난로로 가서, 우리 저녁을 만들려무나.”
부엌에 간 소녀는 모든 것이 넘쳐나는 걸 보았답니다. 그래서 맛있는 저녁식사를 만들었지요, 하지만 미처 동물들 생각은 못하고 말았어요.
그녀가 접시들에 음식을 한 가득 담아 식탁으로 옮긴 다음 회색 머릿결의 노인 옆에 자리를 잡고 앉아 음식을 먹는 것으로 자신의 배고픔을 달랬답니다.
그녀가 다 먹고 나서 말했어요.
“피곤한데, 제가 누울만한 침대가 있을까요, 자게요?”
동물들이 대꾸했지요.
“주인님과 먹고, 주인님과 마시면서도, 우리 생각은 않는구나, 어디서 자든 네가 알아서하려무나.”
그때 노인이 말했어요.
“2층에 올라가보면, 침대 두 개가 있는 방이 있을 게다, 침대를 잘 튼 다음, 흰 이불을 덮어놓으면, 나도 올라가 누워 자겠다.”
소녀가 올라가 침대를 말끔히 정돈한 다음 깨끗한 침대시트를 덮었지요.
그녀는 노인이 오는 걸 기다리지 않고 그만 침대 둘 중 하나에 드러눕고 말았답니다.
하지만 잠시 후 회색 머릿결의 노인이 촛불을 들고 와 소녀를 비춰보더니 머리를 절레절레 흔들고 말았지요.
그녀가 꿀잠에 빠진 걸 본 그가 뚜껑문을 열더니 그녀를 지하실로 떨어뜨리고 말았답니다.
밤늦게 집에 돌아온 나무꾼은 아내를 크게 나무라며 “하루 종일 배고파 죽을 뻔했잖아.”라고 말했어요.
“내 탓도 아닌걸요,”라며 아내가 대꾸했어요. “점심을 들고 나간 애가 길을 잃은 게 분명해요, 하지만 내일은 돌아오겠죠.”
하짐나 나무꾼은 다음날 새벽에 일어나 숲으로 나무하러 가면서 이번엔 둘째 딸보고 점심을 가져오라 말했어요.
“이번엔 기장보다 씨앗이 더 큰,”라며 그가 말했어요. “렌즈콩 한 봉지를 들고 가며 뿌리마. 그럼 더 잘 찾을 수 있을 거고, 길도 잃지 않을 게다.”
그리하여 점심 무렵이 되어 음식을 들고 소녀가 길을 나섰어요.
하지만 렌즈콩은 흔적도 없이 사라지고 없었지요.
숲에 사는 새들이 날아와 어제처럼 죄다 주워 먹고 간 뒤였거든요.
소녀는 밤늦도록 숲에서 길을 헤매야했어요, 그런 다음 그녀도 노인이 사는 그 집에 도착하게 되었죠.
노인은 그녀보고도 들어오란 말을 했지요.
소녀가 음식과 침대를 부탁드리자, 흰 수염이 텁수룩한 노인이 동물들에게 물었어요.
“예쁜 암탉아, 귀여운 수탉아, 이쁜 얼룩빼기 암소야, 너희들의 생각은 어떠니?”
동물들이 다시 대꾸했어요.
“둑스.”
그리하여 전날과 같은 일이 모두 다시 일어났어요.
소녀는 맛난 식사를 요리했고, 노인과 함께 마셨지요, 하지만 그녀도 동물들 생각은 미처 하지 못하였답니다.
그녀가 침대를 요구하자, 동물들이 대답했어요.
“주인님과 먹고, 주인님과 마시면서도, 우리 생각은 않는구나, 어디서 자든 네가 알아서하려무나.”
그녀가 잠들었을 때 그 노인이 와 그녀를 들여다보더니 이번에도 고개를 절레절레 흔들며 그녀를 지하실로 떨어뜨리고 말았답니다.
셋째 날 아침에 나무꾼이 아내보고 말했어요.
“오늘 점심은 막내(딸)를 보내구려, 그 애는 착하고 말을 잘 들으니 곧장 갖다 줄 거요, 지(자기) 언니들처럼 호박벌들을 쫓아다닐 리도 없겠지.”
엄마는 그러고 싶지 않아서 말했어요.
“우리 예쁜 막내까지 잃게 하실 참인가요?”
“걱정도 팔자요,”라며 그가 대꾸했어요. “그 애는 길을 잃지 않아. 얼마나 신중하고 총명한데. 게다가 내가 이번엔 완두콩을 좀 들고 가 흩뿌려놓을 게. 그거면 렌즈콩보다 훨씬 크니 길도 잘 찾을 수 있을 게요.”
하지만 소녀가 팔에 점심바구니를 안고 출발해보니, 참새들이 아빠가 흩뿌려져 놓은 완두콩들을 죄다 먹어치운 터라 도무지 길을 찾을 수가 없었어요.
슬픔이 가득한 가운데서도 그녀는 걸음을 멈추지 않았는데, 배고파하실 아빠 생각 때문이었지요. 
그녀가 집에 돌아오지 않음 착한 엄마는 또 얼마나 걱정하실까요.
마침내 날이 저물자, 숲에서 불빛이 보여 가보니 집이 하나 나왔어요.
그녀가 거기서 하룻밤만 재워 달라며 아주 상냥하게 부탁을 드렸지요.
흰 수염을 가진 노인이 다시 한 번 자신의 동물들에게 물었어요.
“예쁜 암탉아, 귀여운 수탉아, 이쁜 얼룩빼기 암소야, 너희들의 생각은 어떠니?”
“둑스,”라며 그들이 말했어요.
그런 다음 소녀는 동물들이 누워있는 난로 쪽으로 가 암탉과 수탉을 귀여워해주고 그들의 보드라운 깃털을 손으로 쓰다듬어주었지요. 그리고 얼룩빼기 암소의 두 뿔(암소도 뿔이 있음) 사이를 사랑스럽게 만져주었답니다.
그런 다음 노인의 분부(지시)에 따라 맛난 스프를 준비해 그릇에 담아 식탁에 올려다놓고 말했지요.
“제가 먹을 때 착한 동물들은 굶어야하다니요? 밖에 음식이 많이 있던데, 제가 가서 가져올게요.”
그래서 그녀가 나가더니 보리를 좀 가져다 뭉근한 불로 끓여 수탉과 암탉에게 주고, 달콤한… 향이 나는 건초를 한 움큼 들고 와 암소 앞에 놓아두었지요.
“많이 먹으려무나, 사랑스런 동물들아,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “앗참 내 정신 좀 봐, 목이 마를 때를 대비해 물도 새로 떠줄게.”
그런 다음 그녀가 물을 양동이 한 가득 들고 왔지요. 그래서 수탉과 암탉은 그 위에 올라가 앉아 부리(입)을 물에 풍덩 담구고 고개를 다시 들며 물을 꿀꺽꿀꺽 마셨답니다. 얼룩빼기 암소 또한 친절이 가득담긴 그 물을 마시고 목마름을 달랬지요.
동물들이 먹자, 소녀도 노인 옆에 자리 잡고 앉아, 노인이 남긴 음식을 먹었어요.
머지않아 수탉과 암탉이 고개를 자신들의 날개 속에 파묻고 자기 시작했어요. 암소가 눈을 끔벅끔벅거리기 시작했지요.
그러자 소녀가 말했어요.
“자러가도 되나요?”
“예쁜 암탉아, 귀여운 수탉아, 이쁜 얼룩빼기 암소야, 너희들의 생각은 어떠니?”
동물들이 대답했어요.
“둑스.”
“주인님과 먹고, 주인님과 마시면서도, 우리 생각을 잊지 않을 정도로 착한 당신, 안녕히 주무세요.”
그런 다음 처녀가 2층으로 올라가 깃털 침대를 가지런히 하고 깨끗한 침대시트를 그 위에 덮었지요.
그녀가 다하자, 노인이 올라와 침대들 중 하나에 누웠어요, 그의 흰 수염이 발에까지 가 닿았죠.
소녀도 다른 침대에 누웠답니다. 그리곤 감사기도를 드린 다음 꿀잠이 들었죠.
그녀는 밤 12시까지 푹 잤지요, 그런데 밤 12시가 되니 집 안에 큰 소음이 들려 그녀가 깼답니다.
온 사방에서 부서지고 깨지는 소리가 들렸고, 문들이 쾅쾅 열리고 벽에 탕탕 부딪혔지요.
보(기둥과 기둥 사이를 연결하는 수평 보. 벽과는 구조적으로 다름)들은 마치 이음새 부분이 뜯어져나가는 듯 신음소리를 내기 시작했고요, 계단들은 와장창 무너질 듯 소리를 내더니 급기야는 지붕 전체가 와르르 무너질 듯한 요란한 소리가 들려왔어요.
하지만 모든 소리가 다시 한 번 조용해졌기에 소녀는 마음을 다치지 않고 누워있던 침대에 계속 누워 다시 꿀잠에 들었답니다.
하지만 휘황찬란한 아침햇살을 받으며 아침에 깨어나 보니, 아니 이게 다 무슨 광경인가요? 
그녀 자신이 큰 홀에 누워있는 게 아니겠어요, 그리고 그녀 주변의 모든 것들이 훌륭하게 빛을 내뿜고 있지 뭐에요. 
벽들 위에 걸린 푸른 비단에선 황금 꽃들이 자라나고 있었고요, 침대는 상아(코끼리 엄니)로 만들어진 거고요, 침대 위에 지붕처럼 늘어뜨린 덮개는 붉은 벨벳(융털)이었고요, 바로 옆에 있는 의자 위엔 진주로 꾸민 구두 한 쌍이 놓여 있었지요.
소녀는 이게 다 꿈일 거라 여겼어요.
하지만 그때 부유하게 차려입은 세 명의 시종(수행원)들이 들어오더니 “더 분부하실 게 없으신지?” 물어왔어요.
“아아 그럼 저도 곧 일어날게요.”라며 소녀가 대답했어요. “얼른 일어나 할아버지를 위해 스프를 끓이고 예쁘고 귀여운 암탉과 수탉 그리고 이쁜 얼룩빼기 암소에게 먹이도 주어야하거든요.”
그녀는 그 노인이 벌써 일어나 있을 거라 생각해서, 그의 침대로 고개를 돌려보니, 어머 세상에나, 그는 온데간데없고 낮선 이가 그 자리에 누워있지 뭐예요.
잠시 그를 쳐다보던 그녀가 그제야 어제 그 노인이 지금의 잘생긴 젊은이란 걸 깨닫게 되었지요.
깨어난 그가 침대에 앉더니 말했어요.
“나는 사실 왕자요, 사악한 마녀의 마법에 걸려 회색 머릿결을 지닌 노인 모습으로 이 숲에 살아가야했답니다. 암탉과 수탉 그리고 얼룩빼기 암소로 변한 세 명의 시종들만 거느릴 수 있었지요. 제 마법은, 마음씨가 따뜻한 아가씨가 찾아와서 제게는 물론이거니와 제 동물들에게도 몸소 사랑을 실천해주실 때까지 풀리지 않는 마법이었답니다…. 그걸 당신이 해주신 겁니다. 밤 12시에 우리 모두는 마법에서 풀려났지요, 그래서 숲에 있던 이 낡은 오두막집이 도로 궁전으로 돌아갈 수 있었던 거랍니다.”  
그들이 침대에서 일어났을 때, 왕자님은 세 시종들에게 “결혼식 만찬(잔치)을 열게, 얼른 가서 아가씨의 아빠 엄마를 모셔오거라.”라고 지시를 내렸어요.
“하지만 제 두 언니들은 어디 있나요?”라며 처녀가 여쭈었지요. 
“제가 그들을 지하실로 모셔두었답니다. 내일 그들을 숲으로 데려가 숯꾼(숯을 굽는 사람)의 조수로 일을 시킬 거랍니다. 그럼 그녀들은 더 상냥해져서 불쌍한 동물들을 굶주린 채 두는 일이 다신 없을 거예요.”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「숲 속의 오두막집」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「숲 속의 오두막집」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter170.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



171. 기쁨도 함께 슬픔도 함께 (동고동락)



옛날에 싸우기를 좋아하는 재봉사(옷 만드는 사람)가 한 명 있었지요.
착하고 부지런하고 신앙심이 깊은 아내가, 남편은 영 마음에 들지 않았죠.
그녀가 무얼 하든 그는 만족하지 않고 투덜거리고 꾸짖고 트집을 잡았을 뿐만 아니라 때리기까지 했어요.
마침내 이 얘기가 정부당국 관계자의 귀에까지 들어가, 그들이 남편을 소환해 선량하게 만들 의도로 감옥에 집어넣었답니다.
그래서 그는 잠시 빵과 물로만 끼니는 때워야 했죠, 그런 다음 다시 풀려났답니다.
하지만 풀려나는 조건으로, 자기 아내를 다신 때리지 않고 잘 대해주며, 결혼한 사람들이 응당 그리해야하듯 자신도 아내와 기쁨도 함께 슬픔도 함께 나누겠다는 맹세를 하여야했답니다. 
한동안은 그가 정말 변한 듯 했지요. 하지만 제 버릇 남 주나요, 예전 버릇으로 돌아가 또 싸우려고만 들었죠.
그래도 감히 아내를 때리지는 않았지만 이번엔 그녀의 머리채를 움켜쥐고 잡아 뜯으려 들었답니다.
여자가 그에게서 달아나 안마당으로 가면, 그도 자신의 ‘자’(길이를 재는 자)와 가위를 들고서 그녀를 뒤쫓으며 자와 가위를 그녀를 향해 마구 내던졌지요. 그 뿐만 아니라 도중에 손에 잡히는 건 뭐든 집어 던졌답니다.
그럼 아내가 맞잖아요, 그럼 그는 마구 웃어댔어요, 또 아내를 못 맞추면, 그는 길길이 날뛰며 욕설을 해댔지요.
하도 다급해 이웃들이 아내를 도우러 달려왔고, 급기야 재봉사는 다시 소환되어 판사님 앞에 불려나오게 되었답니다.
판사(치안판사)님들이 그가 맹세했던 들먹였어요.
“판사님들,”이라며 그가 말했어요. “맹세하건데, 아내를 때린 게 아니라 기쁨도 함께 슬픔도 함께 나누려던 것입니다.”
“그게 뭔 소리냐,”라며 재판관이 말했어요. “너의 폭력이 끊이지 않았다며, 아내가 고충을 계속해서 제기하는데?”
“제가 아내를 때린 게 아니라 그냥 너무 낯설게 느껴져 제 손으로 그녀의 머리카락들을 빗어주려던 것이었지요. 그런데 그녀가 제게 악의를 품고서 달아나지 뭡니까. 
그래서 저도 그녀를 쫓아갔지요, 마누라가 도망가는데 가만있을 남편이 어디 있습니까요, 그래서 돌아오게 할 목적으로 마침 손에 잡히는 것도 있고 하여 훈계의 목적으로 던진 것 뿐입니다요. 저는 아내와 기쁨도 함께 슬픔도 함께 나누었습니다. 제가 그녀를 맞추면 저는 기쁨으로 충만했고 그녀는 슬펐지요, 제가 만약 빗맞히면 그녀는 기쁨으로 충만했고 저는 슬펐지요.“
판사님들은 이 대답에 만족하지 않았어요, 그렇지만 그에게 상응하는 벌을 주는 건 잊지 않았답니다. 
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「기쁨도 함께 슬픔도 함께 (동고동락)」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「기쁨도 함께 슬픔도 함께 (동고동락)」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter171.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



172. 굴뚝새



옛날에는 모든 소리들에 그 나름의 의미와 쓰임이 있었어요.
대장장이가 해머를 치면, 이런 소리가 났죠.
“때려! 때려버려.”
목수가 대패질을 하면, 이런 소리가 났죠.
“자 시작한다! 시작.”
물방아가 구구구 돌기 시작하면, 이런 소리가 났죠.
“도와줘요, 하느님! 도와줘요, 하느님!”
그리고 그 물방앗간 주인이 손님을 속이고 밀가루를 슬쩍하려하면, 독일인이 표준어로 처음에 이렇게 나긋하게 말하죠.
“저게 뭐야? 저게 뭐야?”
그런 다음 재빨리 이런 말이 새어나오죠.
“에구머니나, 방앗간 주인이네! 방앗간 주인이야!”
그리곤 결국 황급한 말투로 이렇게 말하죠.
“저 놈이 또 슬쩍하네! 또 슬쩍해! 아주 그냥 한 바가지를 슬쩍해.”
이때는 새들도 또한 저마다의 언어가 있어 모두 이해되는 말들을 했지요. 지금이야 뭐 그냥 짹짹거리는 거 같고 찍찍거리는 거 같고 휘파람소리 같고 의미 없는 노랫소리 같이 들리지만요.
그러다 새들의 마음속에도 ‘더는 통치자 없이 지낼 수 없어, 우리의 왕을 뽑자구.’라는 생각이 들었죠.
새들 중 초록색 물떼새만이 이에 반기를 들고 나왔죠.
그는 지금껏 자유롭게 살아왔으니 자유롭게 살다 죽고 싶다고 했죠. 그가 걱정스레 이리 저리 날아다니며 소리쳤어요.
“이제 난 어디로 가지? 이제 난 어디로?”
그는 쓸쓸하고 인적 드문 늪에 틀어박혀서는 이후 다시는 새들 친구들 사이에 모습을 드러내지 않았죠.
새들이 이제 이 문제를 본격적으로 토론해보고 싶어, 화창한 어느 5월 아침 날 숲과 들판에서 다 같이 나와 한자리에 모였답니다.
독수리와 ‘되새’(작은 새)들, 올빼미와 까마귀들, 종달새와 참새들, 어찌나 많이들 모였던 지요. 
심지어 뻐꾸기도 왔답니다. 그러니 뻐꾸기의 집사라 불리는 ‘후투티’(새 이름. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/fTVPfm )도 왔지요. 뻐꾸기가 오기 며칠 전에 우린 항상 후투티의 울음소리를 들을 수 있기에 후투티를 뻐꾸기의 집사라 부르죠.
또한 몸집이 너무 작아 아직 이름조차 없던 ‘새’(굴뚝새) 한 마리도 이 큰 무리들 속에 섞여 있었죠.
일이 있어 토론 얘기를 전혀 듣지 못했던 암탉은 새들이 왕창 모여 있자 눈이 휘둥그레졌어요.
“뭐야, 뭐, 뭔 일이 난거야?”라며 그녀가 꼬꼬댁거렸죠.
그러자 암탉의 연인인 수탉이 말해주었답니다. “그냥 부자들 모임이야.”
수탉도 자신이 주어들은 얘길 그녀에게 해주었지요.
한편 새들은 결론을 내렸어요.
“우리들 중 가장 높이 나는 새가 왕이 되어야해.”
수풀 사이에 앉아 있던 청개구리 한 마리가 그 말을 듣곤 경고하며 외쳤어요.
“안 돼, 안 돼, 안 돼에! 안된다고!”
왜냐면 그렇게 왕을 뽑으면 수많은 눈물을 흘리게 될 거란 거죠.
하지만 까마귀는 말했어요.
“까옥, 까옥.”
이리하여 그 안건은 만장일치로 통과가 되었답니다. 
이날 날씨가 화창했기에 그들은 즉시 날아올라 왕을 뽑자고 말했어요.
이리되니 너도 나도 더 높이 날 수 있다고 아우성들이었어요.
“내가 더 높이 날아, 저녁 되면, 못 나니 지금 날자구나.”
그래서 신호와 함께, 모든 새들이 하늘로 날아올랐어요.
땅엔 수북이 먼지가 피어오르고, 새들의 천둥 같은 퍼덕임 소리와 휙휙 하는 소리 철퍼덕 하는 소리가 메아리쳐 마치 먹구름이 하늘로 솟구치는 것 같았어요.
하지만 작은 새들은 곧 내려오고 말았어요. 더는 높이 날 힘이 없어 땅으로 되돌아온 거죠.
큰 새들은 그래도 좀 더 버텼어요. 
하지만 그중에 제일은 독수리였죠. 그는 정말이지 해님의 눈을 쪼아댈 만큼이나 높이 날았거든요.
다른 새들이 더는 자신을 못 쫓아오는 걸 보고 그가 생각했어요.
“더 높이는 날 필요가 없겠다, 이제 내가 왕인가?”
그가 다시 내려오기 시작했어요.
아래에 있던 새들이 동시에 독수리를 향해 외쳐댔어요.
“당신은 우리의 왕이세요, 누구도 당신보단 더 높이 날지 못했으니까요.”
“나를 빼면 섭하지(섭섭하지).”라며 이름 없던 작은 새가 독수리의 가슴부분 깃털 사이에서 삐져나오며 소리쳤어요.
게다가 그는 전혀 지치지도 않은 상태였기에 쑥 삐져나오더니 높이 솟아올라 하늘나라에까지 가 닿았어요.
이렇게 멀찍이 놀라간 다음 다시 날개를 접고 아래를 향해 크고 또렷한 목소리로 외쳐댔지요.
“내가 왕이다! 내가 왕이라고.”
“뭐 네까짓 게 우리들의 왕이라고?”라며 새들이 분개하며 소리 질렀어요. “넌 속임수를 쓴 거잖아, 이 교활한 녀석아!”
그래서 새들이 새로운 조건을 내걸었지요.
누구든 땅 속으로 가장 깊이 들어가는 새를 왕으로 삼기로 했답니다.
그러자 거위가 땅 속으로 파고들려고 어찌나 넓은 가슴을 파닥이며 몸부림치던지! 수탉도 구멍을 내보려고 땅을 어찌나 빨리 파헤치고 있던지요!
오리는 최악의 상황에 처하고 말았죠, 왜냐면 도랑을 통해 땅속으로 기어들려다 그만 다리를 삐고 말아 기우뚱거리며 인근 연못으로 대피해야했거든요.
오리가 이렇게 외쳤어요.
“속임수야, 속임수라고!”
하지만 이 와중에도 이름 없는 작은 새는 쥐구멍 하나를 발견해… 구멍 속으로 쏙 들어가 그 안에서 밖으로 향해 작은 목소리로 소리쳤어요.
“내가 왕이다! 내가 왕이야!”
“네까짓 게 왕이라고!”라며 새들이 전보다 훨씬 더 분개하며 소리 질렀어요. “네 속임수가 통할 거라 생각하니?”
새들이 그를 구멍 속에 감금해 굶어죽이기로 의견을 모았어요.
올빼미가 그 구멍 앞에서 보초를 서게 되었어요. 그 개구쟁이 악당이 만일의 경우에라도 빠져나가지 못하게 말이죠.
저녁이 되어 모든 새들이 하루 종일 날개를 퍼덕인 탓에 지쳐 자신들의 아내와 아이들을 데리고 자러 가버렸지요.
올빼미만 남아 쥐구멍을 지키고 있었죠. 그녀는 한동안 두 눈을 부라리며 잘 지켰어요.
그러다 시간이 좀 지나자 올빼미도 지치긴 마찬가지라 속으로 생각했지요.
‘한 눈만 감자, 다른 쪽 눈으로 잘 지키면 되잖아, 그래도 작은 악당이 빠져나오지 못하게 지킬 수 있어.’
그리하여 그녀(올빼미)가 한쪽 눈을 감고, 다른 쪽 눈으로 생쥐 구멍을 곧장 쳐다봤어요.
작은 친구가 머리를 쏙 내밀어 밖을 엿보며 빠져나오려고 하면, 올빼미가 즉시 다가왔기에, 작은 친구가 황급히 머리를 도로 넣어버렸죠.
그럼 올빼미는 다시 반대쪽 눈을 뜨고, 다른 쪽 눈을 감았어요, 이렇게 올빼미는 온 밤을 보초를 설 작정이었죠.
그러다 한번은 그만 한쪽 눈을 감은 다음 다른 쪽 눈을 뜨는 걸 깜빡 잊고 말았고, 그렇게 두 눈을 감자마자 그녀는 곯아떨어지고 말았답니다.
작은 친구는 이걸 보자마자 잽싸게 빠져나와 도망쳐버렸죠.
이 이후로, 올빼미는 다시는 대낮에 모습을 드러내지 않았어요, 왜냐면 그랬다간 다른 새들이 그녀(올빼미)의 깃털을 잡아 뽑겠다며 달려들었거든요.
그녀(올빼미)는 또한 밤에만 날아다니며 그런 추악한 쥐구멍을 만든 생쥐들을 증오하며 뒤쫓았죠.
작은 새 또한 모습을 드러내려하지 않았어요, 왜냐면 다시 또 붙잡혔다간 목숨을 잃을 게 뻔했으니까요.
그래도 울타리 안에서 이러 저리 몰래 움직일 땐 안전하다 싶으면 이따금씩 이렇게 외쳤답니다.
“내가 왕이다.”
이 때문에 다른 새들이 그를 “굴뚝새”라며 더 놀려댔어요. 굴뚝새란 독일어로 “울타리 왕”이란 뜻이거든요.
하지만 어떤 새도 작은 왕에게 복종할 필요가 없던 종달새보다 더 행복하진 못했지요.
해가 나면, 그녀(종달새)는 하늘 높이 날아올라 노래를 불렀지요.
“아, 얼마나 아름다운가! 아름다워! 아름, 아름! 아, 얼마나 아름다운가!”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「굴뚝새」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「굴뚝새」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter172.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



173. 가자미



물고기들은 오랜 세월 자신들의 왕국에 질서가 없는 것에 불만이었어요.
누구도 상대방에게 길을 빗겨주지 않거니와, 왼쪽이든 오른쪽이든 지들 가고 싶은 대로 헤엄쳤죠. 개중에는 새치기도 했고요, 강한 물고기가 약한 물고기를 꼬리로 탁 쳐서 날려버리기도 했고요, 내쫓기도 했고요, 아님 꿀꺽 하고 집어삼켜먹어버리고는 입 딱 씻고 시치미 뚝 떼기도 했지요.
“어쩜 좋지,”라며 그들이 말했어요. “우리도 법과 정의를 집행해주는 왕이 있었음!”
그래서 그들이 통치자를 뽑기 위해 모두 같이 모였답니다.
물살을 가르며 가장 빨리 헤엄쳐가는 물고기를 통치자로 뽑아 약한 물고기들을 보호해주자고 의견을 모았죠.
그리하여 모두 열을 지어 바닷가에 정렬했답니다.
그리곤 ‘강꼬치고기’(포악한 물고기)가 자신의 꼬리로 신호를 하자, 모든 물고기들이 일제히 출발을 했답니다.
강꼬치고기가 화살보다 빠르게 앞질러 나아가기 시작했고요, 그와 함께 ‘청어’, 모샘치(=잉어), 농어, 잉어가 선두권을 형성하고, 나머지 모든 물고기들이 그들 뒤를 따랐죠.
심지어 ‘가자미’조차도 결승점에 도착을 하겠다고 물고기들 사이에 끼어 헤엄치고 있었답니다.
그때 갑자기 큰소리들이 들려왔어요.
“청어가 1등이다!”
“누가 1등이라고?”라며 납작한 가자미가 질투심이 나서 발끈 소리를 질렀지요. 가자미는 이때 선두권에서도 한참 뒤에서 가고 있었거든요. “누가 1등이라고?”
“청어야! 청어.”라는 대답이 돌아왔어요.
“그 벌거벗은 청어 놈 말이야?”(청어는 둥근 비늘을 가졌음)라고 질투에 사로잡힌 생물이 소리쳤어요. “벌거벗은 청어 놈?”
그때부터 가자미의 입은 벌을 받아 한쪽으로 삐뚤어진 거라네요.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「가자미」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「가자미」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter173.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



174. 알락해오라기와 후투티(둘 다 새 이름임)



이번 동화에서 새 이름은 중요하지 않습니다. 새 이름 모르셔도 됩니다. 다만 참고삼아 아래에 사진을 각각 링크 걸어놓았습니다. 참고만 하세요. 동화 내용과 해당 새 이름과는 큰 상관은 없어요.
 
참고사항 : 
1. 알락해오라기(새 이름. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/hH6I7D )
2. 후투티(새 이름. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/fTVPfm )

(아래부터가 동화 시작임)

“당신의 소떼에게 먹이기에 가장 좋은 곳이 어디입니까?”라며 어느 남자가 ‘소치는’(소를 돌보는) 노인에게 말했어요.
“여기요, 선생, 이곳 잔디가 너무 무성하지도 그렇다고 너무 빈약하지도 않소, 다른 곳은 죄다 쓸모없지요.”
“그건 또 왜 그렇습니까?”라며 그 남자가 물었어요.
“저기 늪지대에서 울적하게 우는 소리가 들리시지요?”라며 소치는 노인이 대답했어요. “저건 ‘알락해오라기’(새 이름. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/hH6I7D )의 울음소리지요. 그(알락해오라기)는 일찍이 소치는 사람이었어요, ‘후투티’(새 이름. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/fTVPfm )도 마찬가자였죠… 제가 얘기 하나 해드리지요.” 

(아래의 글 모두 ‘소치는 노인’의 대사입니다.)

알락해오라기(새 이름)가 한 번은 꽃이 만발한 무성하고 푸른(초록색) 풀밭에서 자신의 소떼들에게 풀을 뜯게 하고 있었지요, 그러다 그만 암소들이 사나워져 다루지를 못하게 되고 말았죠.  
반면 ‘후투티’(새 이름. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/fTVPfm )는 풀 한 포기 자라지 않는 높은 언덕 위로 자신의 소들을 몰고 갔지요. 거긴 모래바람이 강풍이 되어 노니는 곳이라, 암소들이 점점 야위어져 힘을 전혀 못쓰게 되고 말았답니다.
저녁이 되어, 소치는 사람들이 암소들을 집으로 몰고 가려해도, 알락해오라기(새 이름)는 자신의 소떼를 다시 모을 수가 없었고, 소들을 점점 기운이 차고 넘치다 달아나버렸지요. 
그래서 그(알락해오라기)는 이렇게 소리질렀지오.
“와, 소들아, 오라고.”
그래도 전혀 소용이 없었답니다.
소들 아무도 그의 외침에 눈길 한 번 주지 않았으니까요.
반면 ‘후투티’(새 이름)의 소들은 너무도 기력(힘)이 약해져 네 발로 일어설 수도 없게 되고 말았죠.
그래서 “일어서, 얼른, 일어서라고.”라며 그가 고레고레 소리를 질렀지만 모두 허사였답니다. 소들이 아직도 그 모래언덕 위에 누워 있으니까요.
이것이 사람은 절제를 잃지 말아야하는 이유입니다.
그리고 그것이 오늘까지도 자신들의 소떼를 생각하며, 알락해오라기(새 이름)가 “와, 소들아, 오라고.”라며 울고, ‘후투티’(새 이름)가 “일어서, 얼른, 일어서라고.”라고 우는 이유이지요.

(소치는 노인의 대사 끝)
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「알락해오라기와 후투티 (←새 이름들임)」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「알락해오라기와 후투티 (←새 이름들임)」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter174.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



175. 부엉이



2~3백 년 전, 그러니까 사람들이 지금보다 그렇게 기교있거나 영악하지 않았던 시절에, 어느 작은 마을에 기절초풍할 사건이 하나 일어났습니다.
수리부엉이(몸길이 70센티미터. 머리 위로 귀가 솟아나 있음)라 불리는 큰 부엉이 한 마리가 운 나쁘게도 근처 숲을 날다 그만 야밤에 마을 사람들 중 한 명의 헛간에 들어가게 되었습니다.
그리곤 날이 새자 감히 이 은신처에서 다시 나갈 생각을 못하였지요. 왜냐면 다른 새들이 그녀(부엉이)만 봤다하면 비명을 질러대며 날아올랐기 때문이지요.
아침에 그 집 하인이 그 헛간에 짚을 가지러 들어갔다가 거기 구석에 앉아 있던 부엉이의 모습을 보곤 기겁을 해 달아나 주인에게 “생전 처음 보는 괴물이 흉악한 얼굴을 하고서 사람을 잡아먹을 듯 헛간에 앉아 있어요. 머리 위로 눈을 돌리면서요.”라고 말했어요.
“내가 너를 모를 거 같으냐,”라며 주인이 말했어요. “네 용기론 그저 들판에서 지빠귀(=참새)나 쫓으면 다다. 예전에 죽은 암탉이 놓여있는 것만 보고서도 다짜고짜 몽둥이부터 찾던 네가 아니냐. 네가 보았다는 그 괴물이 어떤 종류인지 내 직접 가서 봐야겠다.”
주인은 그 말을 하고서 대담무쌍하게 곡물창고로 들어가 사방을 두리 번 그렸지요.
하지만 웬 낯설고 험상궂은 생물체와 두 눈이 마주쳤을 땐 덜컥 겁이 나기는 주인도 자신의 하인과 마찬가지였지요.
두 사람은 그 길로 줄행랑을 쳐 이웃집들로 달려가 위험하고 알 수 없는 짐승이 나타났다며 도움을 청했지요. 그렇지 않으면 곧 그 괴물이 헛간에서 나와 온 마을을 덮쳐 위험에 빠뜨릴 거란 얘기도 잊지 않았고요. 
온 거리에 거대한 소란과 동요가 휘몰아쳤지요.
마을사람들이 저마다 창, ‘건초용 쇠스랑’(포크처럼 생긱 농기구), 큰 낫, 도끼로 무장들을 하고서 마치 전쟁에 나갈 듯 모여들었어요.
결국엔 관리들이 자신들의 우두머리인 시장님까지 대동하고 나타났을 정도니까요.
그들은 시장에 모인 다음… 그 문제의 장소인, 헛간으로 나아갔어요.
곧 그들이 헛간 주변을 빙 둘러쌓지요.
그런 까닭에 마을에서도 가장 용기 있는 자들이란 자들은 죄다 창을 내리깔고 한 발 내딛었지만 곧 죽을 듯이 얼굴이 창백해져서는 외마디 비명만 지르고는 도망쳐 나오더니 한 마디 말도 못하는 거예요.
곧 다른 두 사람이 더 모험을 해보았지만, 그들의 처지도 앞서 들어갔다온 사람들과 별반 다르지 않았어요.
마침내 한 사람이 앞으로 쿵 발을 내딛었어요. 그는 전쟁터에서 세운 공로로 유명한 남성으로 강인함에 있어선 최고의 사내였지요.
그가 말했어요.
“고작 괴물 하나에 주눅이 들어선 여자 마냥 겁을 집어 먹고 있다니, 동물 사냥도 못할 놈들 같으니라고.”
그는 사람들에게 말해 무기를 좀 챙겨 달라 명령했어요, 그런 다음 검 하나와 창 하나만 쥐고서 갑옷을 입고 걸어 들어갔지요.
모두가 그의 용기를 칭찬했어요. 
“저 사람이 나선다면 이제 두려울 게 없다.”
헛간 문을 활짝 열어젖히고 들여다보니, 부엉이는 ‘대들보’(지붕을 떠받치기 위해, 기둥 사이에 놓음. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/NrIY2X ) 한 가운데에 올라가 앉아 있었어요.
그가 사다리를 가져와 올라가 거의 위에 닿을 때쯤 되자, 사방에서 사람들이 그에게 소리치며 칭찬하길, “공격하쇼. 용을 무찌른 성 조지(말을 타고 용과 싸우는 그림에 자주 나오는 신화 속 인물)처럼 공격해요.”라고 했어요.
그가 꼭대기에 다다랐을 때, 부엉이는 그의 공격 의도가 엿보이고 그리고 사방에서 외쳐대는 사람들의 아우성 소리에 당황해 도망갈 타이밍을 놓쳐버리고 말아 그냥 눈만 사방으로 굴리며 깃털을 곤두세우며 두 날개를 펄럭이며 주둥이(입)로 딱딱 소리를 내며 외치고 있었어요.
“부엉, 부엉.”
그건 정말이지 귀에 거슬리는 야만스런 소리였지요.
“한방에 보내! 한방에 보내버리라고!”라며 밖에 있던 사람들이 용감무쌍한 영웅을 향해 외쳐댔어요.
“니들이 여기 한 번 서 봐,”라며 그가 대답했지요. “그 소리가 나오나, 한 방에 보내라니!” 
그는 사다리의 마지막 발판 하나만 남겨놓곤 그만 떨기 시작하더니 반쯤 실신해 되돌아 나오고 말았어요.
이리되니 이젠 누구도 감히 그런 위험을 감내하려고 하지 않았지요.
“괴물이,”라며 그들이 말했어요. “우리들 중에서도 가장 강한 자들에게 달려들고 때려서 치명타를 입혔어! 우리마저 여기 있다 당하는 거 아냐?”
그들은 마을을 방어하기 위해 어찌해야할지를 놓고 열띤 토론을 했어요.
오래 말을 해보았지만 모두가 역시나 쓸 때 없는 말들뿐이었어요.
결국 시장님이 임시 조치를 강구해내셨어요.
“제 의견은,”라며 그가 말했지요. “이렇습니다. 마을금고에 있는 돈으로 이 헛간과 헛간에 든 곡식과 짚 그리고 건초 대금을 소유자에게 지불하더라도, 이 헛간을 저 끔찍한 괴물과 함께 몽땅 불태워 버려야한다는 것입니다, 여러분. 그럼 누구도 위험을 감수할 필요가 없어요. 비용문제는 차차 생각해봅시다. 쩨쩨하게 굴다간 일을 그르쳐요.”
모두가 시장의 말에 동의를 해주었어요.
그리하여 그들은 사방모두(동서남북)에서 그 헛간에 불을 놓았어요. 
그와 함께 부엉이도 타죽고 말았지요.
안 믿겨지시는 분들은 거기 가서 직접 한 번 물어보세요.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「부엉이」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「부엉이」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter175.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



176. 달



왕년(옛날)에 밤에 항상 깜깜한 국가가 하나 있었어요. 하늘은 칠흑같이 어둡기만 했지요. 왜냐면 달이 절대 뜨질 않았거든요, 그리고 반짝이는 별들도 없었고요. 비록 태초에는 밤에 빛이 충분했지만 말이에요. 
그 국가의 세 젊은이가 한 번은 나라 밖으로 여행을 나섰다 어떤 왕국에 도착했는데, 거기선 저녁이면 해는 산 뒤로 사라지지만 빛나는 공 하나가 떡갈… 나무 위에 걸려 있는 거예요. 부드러운 빛이 사방으로 비추고 있었죠.
그 빛에 의지해 모든 게 눈에 보이고 구별이 가능했답니다. 비록 태양만큼은 밝진 않았지만 말이에요.
여행자들이 걸음을 멈추곤 때마침 달구지를 끌고 지나가던 시골사람에게 저 빛이 무슨 종류의 것이냐고 물어보았어요.
“저건 달이오.”라며 그가 대답했어요. “우리 시장님이 은화 3개를 주고 사오셨지요. 그래서 저기 저 떡갈나무에 매달아놓으신 겁니다. 시장님은 매일 저 달에 기름을 붓고 닦았지요. 그걸 매일 하다 보니 저렇게 밝을 수 있는 겁니다. 대신 시장은 시민들에게서 그 대가로 1주일에 은화 1개씩을 받아가지요.”
시골사람이 가고 나자, 젊은이들 중 한 명이 말했어요. 
“우리가 이 등을 유용하게 사용할 수 있겠는데, 우리 고향에도 이따만 한 떡갈나무가 하나 있잖아, 딱 이 크기인데. 우리가 이걸 거기에 걸어놓을 수 있을 거야. 깜깜한 밤에 더듬으며 나아가지 않아도 되니 이 얼마나 좋겠어!”
“당장 하자.”라며 두 번째 젊은이가 말했어요. “달구지와 말을 가져올게, 그거면 달을 옮길 수 있을 거야. 여기 사람들은 또 다른 달을 사면되는 거고 말이야.”
“난 기어오르는 거라면 자신 있어.”라며 세 번째 젊은이가 말했어요. “내가 달을 아래로 내려가지고 올게.”
두 번째 젊은이가 가서 달구지와 말들을 끌고 왔고, 세 번째 젊은이가 나무를 기어 올라가 달에 구멍을 하나 뚫고는 새끼줄을 끼어 아래로 끌고 왔어요.
빛나는 공을 달구지에 놓고 천으로 그 위를 덮었기에, 아무도 그 도둑질을 눈치 채지 못했답니다.
그들이 안전하게 자기 나라로 달을 가지고 와, 높은 떡갈나무 위에 걸어 놓았어요.
남녀노소 모두가 이 새로운 등이 온 누리를 환하게 비춰주지 기뻤어요. 정말이지 침실이며 거실이며 달빛이 닿지 않는 곳이 없었죠.
난쟁이들도 바위동굴에서 나왔고, 귀여운 빨간 외투를 입은 작은 요정들도 풀밭에서 둥글게 둥글게 춤을 추었답니다.
네 젊은이는 그 달에 기름을 보충해주며 열심히 ‘심지’(촛불의 심지)를 청소했지요. 그 대신 사람들로부터 1주일에 은화 1개씩을 받았답니다.
하지만 그들이 노인이 되고, 그들 중 한 명이 병이 들어 거의 죽기 직전 자기 몫의 달 1/4(4분의 1)을 떼어다 자기 무덤에 같이 묻어달라 말했지요.
그가 죽자, 시장은 나무로 올라가 울타리를 정리하는 큰 가위로 달을 1/4만큼 잘라내 그의 관 속에 넣어주었지요.
달빛이 죽었지만 여전히 환했어요.
두 번째 노인이 죽자, 그 몫의 달을 떼어 함께 묻어주는 바람에 빛이 좀 줄었지요.
그렇게 세 번째 노인이 죽은 뒤로는 확연히 달빛이 줄었고요, 네 번째 노인마저 남은 달과 함께 땅에 묻히고 나자, 나라는 이전처럼 깜깜해졌답니다.
사람들은 밤에 밖에 나갈 때면 등불 없이는 나갈 수 없었고요, 머리를 서로 부딪치곤 했지요.
하지만 그렇게 묻힌 달 조각들은, 어둠이 지배적인 그곳 지옥에서 다시 하나로 합쳐졌는데요, 그 바람에 죽었던 자들이 들떠 잠에서 깨어나고 말았답니다.
그들은 다시 앞을 볼 수 있게 되자 놀라워했지요.
달빛이 정말 아주 밝았거든요. 왜냐면 지하에서 그들의 시력은 쨍한 햇빛을 견딜 수 없을 정도로 약해졌기 때문이지요.
축제 기분으로 일어난 그들은 다시 예전 자신들의 생활태도로 돌아가고 말았어요. 
그들 중 일부는 놀이를 하고 춤을 추었고요, 또 일부는 술집에 가 포도주를 벌컥벌컥 마셔대며 말다툼을 벌이거나 싸움질을 하다 결국엔 몽둥이까지 집어 들며 서로를 때려댔지요.
그 소음이 점점 커지고 커지더니 마침내는 하늘나라 천국에까지 가 닿았어요.
천국의 문을 지키는 성 베드로(예수님의 제자)는 지옥에서 반란이 일어났다 생각하고서 하늘나라 군대들을 전부 모았답니다. 그래서 마왕이 군대를 이끌고 축북 받은 거처(천국)에 돌진해올 경우에 물리치기 위함이었죠.
그런데 시간이 지나도 안 오는 거예요.
그래서 성 베드로가 말에 올라 천국의 문을 지나 지옥으로 몰아쳤지요.
거기서 그는 죽은 자들을 다시 복종시키고 그들에게 각자 자신들의 무덤으로 돌아갈 것을 명한 다음, 그 문제의 달을 자신과 함께 가지고 돌아와 천국에다가 걸어놓았답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「달」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「달」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter176.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



177. 수명



하느님께서 만물을 창조하시고 막 생명체들에게 수명을 점지해주실 때, 당나귀가 오더니 물었어요.
“하느님, 제 수명은 얼마죠?”
“30년이란다.”라며 하느님이 대답했어요. “괜찮지?”
“아, 하느님,”라며 당나귀가 물었어요. “너무 길어요. 제 고통 받는 삶은 생각 안 하시나요! 아침부터 밤까지 무거운 짐을 날라야 하고, 곡식 자루들을 방앗간으로 끌고 가 다른 사람들이 먹게 해야 하잖아요. 그러면서도 기운 내라 힘내라 하며 걷어차이고 맞기밖에 더 하냐고요. 그러니 제 수명을 좀만 줄여주세요.”
하느님은 그를 불쌍히 여기시곤 그에게 18년이란 수명을 주셨지요.
당나귀가 만족해선 물러가자, 이번엔 개가 나타났어요.
“너는 얼마만큼 살고 싶은 게냐?”라며 하느님이 그에게 물었어요. “30년이라면 당나귀에겐 너무 많을지 모르나 네겐 적당할 거 같은데.”
“하느님,”라며 개가 대답했어요. “설마 정말 그러시려는 건 아니죠? 죽어라고 뛰어야만 하는 제 팔자 좀 생각해 보세요, 그렇게 오래 뛰다간 제 다리가 다 닳고 말 걸요, 아니 저 보고 30년 동안이나 짖어대고 이빨로 물고나 있으라니, 그럼 그렇게 살아서 제게 남는 게 이리저리 뛰어다니며 으르렁거리는 거 말고 뭐가 있다고요?”
하느님이 보시기에 그의 말이 옳았어요. 그래서 하느님은 그의 수명을 20년으로 점지해주셨지요.
다음으로 원숭이가 왔어요.
“넌 30년을 기꺼이 살고 싶겠지?”라며 하느님께서 그에게 물었어요. “넌 당나귀처럼 일할 필요도 없고 개처럼 짖을 필요도 없이 그냥 온전히 네 삶을 즐기면 되잖니.”
“아! 하느님,”라며 그가 대답했어요. “그건 그거고, 이건 이거죠. 상황이 전혀 다르다고요. 죽도 없는데 숟가락부터 갖다 주시면 저보고 뭘 어쩌라고요. 전 항상 장난을 치며 실력자들을 웃겨야한다고요, 행여나 그들이 사과라도 던져주면 전 그 신 맛 나는 걸 아삭 깨물어야하고요! 명랑함 뒤에 숨은 제 슬픔을 왜 못 보아주시는 거예요! 30년 동안은 정말 못 살아요.”
그리하여 하느님께서는 친절을 베푸시어 그의 수명을 10년으로 줄여주셨습니다.
마지막으로 인간이 나타났어요. 즐겁고 건강하고 원기 왕성한 사람이 자기 수명은 얼마인지 하느님께 여쭈었어요.
“네 수명을 30년으로 하기로 했단다.”라며 하느님께서 말했어요. “그럼 되겠지?”
“너무 짧습니다요,”라며 그가 외쳤어요. “집 짓고 난로에 불 피우고 심은 나무에 꽃이 피고 열매가 익으며 막 인생을 즐기려는데, 죽어야한다니요! 오 하느님, 제 수명 늘려주세용~.”
“그럼 당나귀의 남는 수명 18년을 네게 주마.”라고 하느님이 말씀하셨어요.
“그래도 부족해요,”라며 사람이 대답했어요. 
“개의 남는 수명 12년도 네게 주마.”
“여전히 모자라요!”
“음, 그렇담,”라며 하느님이 말했어요. “원숭이의 남는 수명 10년도 네게 주마, 하지만 이 이상은 안 된단다.”
사람이 물러났어요, 하지만 만족하는 것 같진 않았죠.
그리하여 사람의 수명은 70년이 되었답니다.
처음 30년은 온전히 사람의 수명을 살기에 빨리 지나가죠. 이때는 건강하고 흥겹고 즐겁게 일을 하기에 삶이 만족스럽답니다. 
그런 다음엔 당나귀의 수명 18년을 살게 되는데, 연달아 지는 짐의 무게가 그를 누르기 시작하며 곡식을 날라 다른 이들을 먹여살려야하고, 자신의 충직한 봉사에 대한 보수로 얻어맞거나 차이기 일쑤죠. 
그런 다음엔 개의 수명 12년이 이어진답니다. 구석에 누워 으르렁거리지만 물 이빨이 더는 없죠. 
이 시기가 끝이 나면 원숭이의 수명 10년이 이어지는데. 이때는 사람이 약하기 거지 없죠… 그의 머리가 어찌되어 어리석어지거나 실없는 바보짓을 하며 어린아이들의 놀림감이 된답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「수명」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「수명」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter177.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



178. 저승사자



먼 옛날에 어느 거인 하나가 큰 길 위를 걸으며 여행을 하고 있는데, 느닷없이 정체불명의 괴한이 앞에 쑥 나타나더니 이렇게 말하는 거예요.
“멈춰라, 아무도 지나갈 수 없느니라!”
“니가 뭔데!”라며 거인이 큰소리로 말했죠. “내 손가락 사이로 뭉개도 시원찮을 놈이 뭐 내 앞 길을 막겠다고? 감히 그딴 식으로 말하는 넌 뭐야?”
“난 죽음이다.”라며 상대방이 대답했어요.
“누구도 내게 저항할 수 없다, 누구도 내 명령엔 따라야한다.”
하지만 거인은 거절하곤 대뜸 죽음에게 달려들어 싸우기 시작했죠.
격렬한 싸움이 오래 지속된 후 결국 거인이 우의를 거두어 죽음을 주먹으로 때려눕혔어요. 그 바람에 죽음은 초죽음이 되어 바위 옆에 쓰러져있었어요.
거인은 제갈 길을 갔고, 죽음은 만신창이가 되어 일어나지도 못하고 있었죠.
“이제 어떻게 되지,”라며 그가 말했어요. “내가 이렇게 구석탱이에서 누워만 있음? 세상사람 아무도 죽지 않을 건데, 그럼 사람들로 넘쳐나 서로 마주보며 서 있을 공간도 없게 될 텐데.”
한편 강하고 건강한 어느 젊은이가 노래를 부르며 길 양쪽 편을 힐끗 힐끗 쳐다보며 오고 있었어요.
그러다 반쯤 초죽음이 되어 있는 사람을 보곤 도와주러 와 일으켜주며 자신의 물병으로 입을 젖셔주곤 회복될 때까지 기다려주었지요.
“내가 누군지,”라며 그 낯선 사람이 기운을 차리고 일어나며 말했어요. “알고 도운 게냐?”
“아니오,”라며 젊은이가 대답했어요. “모르겠는데요.” 
“나는 죽음이다.”라며 그가 말했어요. “나는 누구에게도 인정을 베풀지 않지만 네게만은 예외로 하지. 고마우니까. 약속 하마, 나는 너를 불시에 데려가지 않겠다. 내가 너를 데리러오기 전에 내 저승사자들을 미리 보내주마.”
“그럼,”라며 젊은이가 말했어요. “당신이 온다는 걸 미리 알 수 있으니 어쨌든 다행이겠는데요.”
그런 다음 젊은이는 가던 길을 계속 갔지요. 그는 마음 편히 인생을 즐기며 별 걱정 없이 살았죠.
하지만 젊음과 건강은 한때인 법. 곧 질병과 고통들이 찾아와 매일 같이 그를 괴롭히고 밤에도 잠 못 들게 했답니다.
“죽지도 못해,”라며 그가 혼잣말을 했어요. “왜냐면 죽음이 그러기 전에 내게 자기 저승사자들을 보내줄 거니까. 하지만 병으로 너무 아프니까 당장에라도 죽고 싶구나.”
하지만 곧 그는 건강해졌고 다시 예전처럼 활기찬 삶을 다시 영위했답니다.
그러던 어느 날 누군가가 그의 어깨를 톡톡 치는 거예요.
그가 돌아보니 죽음이 자기 앞에 서 있다 이렇게 말하는 거예요.
“나를 따라오게, 이승(현실세계)을 떠날 때가 왔네.”
“뭐라고요,”라며 남자가 대꾸했어요. “그럼 약속이 다르시잖아요? 저를 데려가시기 전에 미리 당신의 저승사자들을 보내준다고 약속하셨잖아요? 전 그동안 아무도 못 봤단 말예요!”
“쉿!”라며 죽음이 대답했어요. “내가 저승사자들을 한명씩 자네에게 보내주지 않았나? 열병이 찾아와 자넬 때리고 흔들며 때려눕히지 않았나? 어지럼증이 생겨 머리가 빙빙 돌지 않았나? 통풍(뼈마디가 아픈 병)이 들어 뼈마디가 아프지 않던가? 귀가 윙윙 울리지 않던가? 치통이 생겨 두 뺨이 아작 날거 같지 않던가? 눈이 침침해지지 않던가? 이 외에도 내 동생인 ‘잠’(쿨쿨 자는 잠)이 매일 밤 나를 떠올리게 하지 않던가? 그 바람에 자넨 벌써 죽은 듯 밤에 제대로 누워있지도 못하지 않았나?”
남자는 한 마디도 대꾸할 수 없었지요.
그는 자신의 운명을 받아들이곤 죽음을 따라갔다고 하네요.

(동화 끝)

동화 「저승사자」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「저승사자」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter178.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



179. 구둣방 주인 송곳 씨
(송곳이 독일어로 ‘프림’임. 원래 제목이 “구굿방 주인 프림”임. 이 동화에서는 ‘까칠남’의 의미임^^. 이 동화는 까칠남이 꿈속에서 천국에 간 얘기랍니다.)





송곳 씨는 땅딸막하고 말랐지만(홀쭉했지만) 생기발랄한 사람이었어요. 그래서 한시도 가만있질 못했답니다.
그의 ‘들창코’(앞에서 콧구멍이 보이는 코)가 그의 얼굴의 지대한 특징이었죠. 그의 얼굴엔 천연두(전염병)를 앓은 흔적이 있고 전체적으로 창백했어요. 그의 머릿결은 흐렸지만 덥수룩했고요, 두 눈은 작았지만 온 사방을 흩고 다니는 그 매서움이란.
그는 정말 온 사방을 다 보았어요. 그것도 그냥이 아니라 항상 매섭게 보았고, 뭔 꼬투리 잡을 게 없나하고서야, 그리고 그는 세상 모든 걸 알았고 온당치 못한 걸 보면 숨이 넘어가는 사람이었어요.
그가 거리로 나가면 정말이지 이 사람이 노를 젓는 것은 아닌지 의심이 들 정도로 두 팔을 힘껏 휘둘렸지요. 그러다 한 번은 물통을 이고 오는 아가씨를 확 쳐 버려 물통이 높이 솟구치는 바람에 그가 몽땅 젖고 말았답니다.
“염병할,”라며 그가 몸을 마구 털며 아가씨보고 소리쳤어요. “당신 뒤에 내가 오는 줄도 모른 거야, 엉?”
직업으로 말하자면 그의 직업은 구둣방 주인이었어요.
실 한 박음이라도 잘못 박혀 있다간 그날 그냥 아작(소리)이 나는 거였죠.
그러다 보니 어느 수습공(일을 배우는 사람)도 그의 밑에선 한 달을 베기지 못하고 달아나버렸어요. 왜냐면 송곳 씨는 아무리 사소한 남의 실수라도 정말 기가 막히게 집어냈거든요.
“실 박음질이 제대로 되어 있지 않잖아!”
또는,
“구두 한 쪽이 너무 길잖아!”
또는,
“이 구두 뒤꿈치는 왜 한쪽만 이리 높아!” 
또는,
“가죽이 모자르냐? 이리 작게 자르게!”
라며 면박을 주었죠.
“있어봐,”라며 그가 수습공(직원)들에게 말했어요. “껍데기를 부드럽게 하는 방법을 내가 곧 보여줄 테니까.”
그는 허리띠를 가져와선 두어 방 때려댔죠.
그는 모두를 게으르다 욕했어요.
그렇다고 그가 자기 일을 열심히 하느냐, 그건 또 아니었거든요, 왜긴요, 15분 이상 자리에 앉아본 적이 없는 사람인데요, 뭘.
아내가 혹시라도 아침에 너무 일찍 일어나 불이라도 붙이면, 그는 냉큼 침대에서 뛰어내려와 맨발로 부엌까지 달려와선 소릴 질러댔어요.
“이런 염병할, 내 집이 당신 때문에 불타겠네? 왜 이 참에 황소라도 한 마리 잡아다 통째 구우시지 그래! 땔감은 누가 공짜로 주는 줄 알아, 이 여편네야?”
행여 하인들이 세수 대야 옆에 서서 농담이라도 했다간 그가 그들 모두를 사정없이 싸잡아 꾸짖으며 말했지요.
“웃고 자빠져 있음 일은 언제할 거야, 이것들아! 새 비누가 왜 필요해? 낭비가 면목없고, 게으른 게 창피한 줄이야 아냐! 손은 뒀다 뭐해, 박박 비벼봐 때가 저절로 나오지!”
그러다 혼자 열불이 나선 돌아가다 멀쩡히 가만 서 있는 비눗물 통을 사정없이 걷어차는 바람에 온 부엌 바닥을 물 바닥으로 만들어버리기도 했지요.
누군가 새 집이라도 짓고 있음, 서둘러 창가로 가 내다보았더랬죠.
“놀고 자빠져 있네, 마르지도 않는 ‘적색(붉은) 사암(건축 골재용 재료)’을 사용해서 어쩌자고!”라며 그가 소리쳤지요. “저 딴 식으로 건물 지어 멀쩡할 집이 어디 있어! 저 꼬락서니 좀 봐, 돌을 저렇게 엉성하게 놓다니 쯧쯧! 게다가, 모르타르(=시멘트)를 저 딴 식으로 바르면 어쩌자는 거야! 거긴 모래가 아니라 자갈을 더 넣어야 한다고, 이 친구야. 집 무너지는 꼴이 눈에 선하다 선해.”
그는 앉아서 실을 두서너 번 박는가 싶더니 다시 후다닥 일어나 작업용 앞치마를 풀어헤치며 소리 질렀어요.
“아무래도 내가 가 봐야겠다, 저 일꾼들의 양심에 호소해봐야겠어.”
그가 냉큼 그 목수들에게로 달려갔어요.
“이게 뭐요?”라며 그가 말했어요. “라인(선)이 안 맞잖소, 라인이! 선을 이리 그으며 ‘빔’(=보=수평기둥=건축구조)을 어찌 똑바로 하려고?… 하나 틀리면 나중엔 다 틀리는 거 몰라.”
그가 냉큼 목수의 손에서 도끼를 낚아채더니 어찌 자르면 되는지 시범을 보이려하는데, 그때 우연히 건초(마른 풀)를 실은 달구지(마차) 하나가 옆을 지나가지 뭐예요, 그가 그 도끼를 도로 던져버리더니 허겁지겁 달구지 옆에서 걷고 있는 그 농부에게로 달려갔어요.
“이 사람 이거 안 되겠구먼,”라며 그가 말했어요. “어린 말들에게 이렇게 무거운 짐을 잔뜩 실은 달구지를 끌게 하는 경우가 어딨소? 말 못하는 짐승들이 뭐 죄여, 응.”
말 같지도 않은 말에 그 농부가 한 마디 대꾸도 하지 않았어요.
그래서 발끈한 ‘송곳 씨’(송곳은 구둣방 도구. 나무나 쇠에 구멍을 뚫는 뾰족한 거)가 자신의 작업실로 도로 돌아왔지요.
그가 다시 자리에 앉아 막 작업을 시작하려는데, 수습공(직원)이 그에게 구두 한 짝을 내밀었어요.
“뭐야, 어쩌라고?”라며 그가 꽥 소리를 질렀어요. “구두를 좀 더 넓게 자르라고 내 누누이 일렀잖아? 이딴 걸 누가 사준단 말이야, 이런 식으로 만들어서 한 짝이라도 팔겠어? 한 땀 한 땀 정성들여 제대로 하란 말이야.”
“저기요,”라며 그 수습공이 대답했어요. “말씀은 그리 하셔도, 이건 사장님이 만드시다 말고 급히 나가시는 바람에 책상에서 굴러 떨어진 구두인걸요. 그걸 제가 막 집어다 드리는 거고요. 물론 하늘나라 천사님도 사장님이 지금 제 말을 믿게 만들 순 없겠지만요.”
그러던 어느 날 밤에 ‘송곳 씨’는 죽어 하늘나라에 가는 꿈을 꾸게 되었답니다.
그가 거기 도착해 문을 큰 소리가 나게 두드렸지요.
“이런 이런,”라며 그가 혼잣말로 말했어요. “어찌된 게 하늘나라 정문에 ‘문 두드리는 고리쇠(노커)’도 없는 겨… 이런 식이면 문 두드리다 사람들 손가락이 죄다 분질러지겠군.”
사도 베드로께서 문을 여시며 누가 이리도 들어오길 시끄럽게 요구하는지 보시고 싶어했어요.
“아, 자네군, 구둣방 주인 송곳 씨(송곳=도구. 씨=남성).”라며 베드로가 말했어요. “기꺼이, 들어오게나, 하지만 미리 주의를 주는 바이네만, 지상에서의 버릇은 버리는 게 좋을 걸세, 하늘나라(천국)엔 자네가 봐도 흠잡을 데가 하나도 없을 거거든, 그러지 않고 여기서도 ‘꼬장’(=심술) 질을 해대다간 고된 생활을 자초하게 될 걸세.”
“그런 말씀 안하셔도,”라며 송곳 씨가 대답했어요. “전 벌써 감 잡았습죠, 여긴 뭐 ‘대댕큐’(정말 고맙)군요, 모든 게 하느님 덕분에 완벽해요, 지상에서완 달리 제가 흠잡을 데가 하나도 없을 겁니다요.”
그리하여 그가 들어가 하늘나라 천국의 광활함 속을 이리 저리 걸었죠.
그는 주변을 둘러도 보고, 왼쪽도 보고 오른쪽도 보고 했답니다. 그런데 이따금씩은 뭔가 심각하게 고개를 흔들더니 혼잣말로 궁시렁 궁시렁 하는 게 아니겠어요.
그때 때마침 두 천사님이 ‘대들보’(지붕을 떠받치기 위해, 기둥 사이에 놓음. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/NrIY2X )를 들고 오는 게 보였어요.
남의 눈에 티끌은 보면서 재 눈의 대들보는 못 본다는 말이 있죠, 지금 딱 그 꼴이었어요.
그들은 그 대들보를 앞뒤로 길게 해서 옮기는 게 아니라 좌우에서 들고 옮기고 있었어요.
‘어리석은 것도 정도껏 해야 이쁘지?’라며 구둣방 주인 송곳 씨가 생각했어요.
하지만 그는 아무 말도 하지 않았답니다. 그냥 그들의 작업방식에 만족하는 척 했죠.
“뻔한 뻔 자 아냐, 그들이 대들보는 똑바로 옮기든 틀리게 옮기든, 그냥 제발 무언가와 부딪쳐 아작 나는 꼴만 안 봤음 한다.”
그 후 곧 그의 눈에 다른 두 천사분이 샘에서 양동이로 물을 담는 게 보였는데, 아 글쎄 그들이 사용하는 양동이에 구멍이 숭숭 많이 뚫려있지 뭐예요, 그래서 물이 온 사방으로 다 새고 있었죠. 양동이에서 샌 물이 지상의 비가 되어 내리고 있었어요.
“제기럴,”라며 그가 외쳤어요. 하지만 천만다행히도 그가 곧 생각을 고쳐먹고 생각했답니다. ‘아마 기분 전환 겸 놀이를 하고 있는 거겠지. 그게 놀이라면 원 참, 여기 하늘나라 천국도 볼 짱 다 봤군, 여기 사는 주민들도 내가 이미 다 눈여겨봤지. 하나같이 다 게을러 터졌어.’
그가 좀 더 나아가니, 이번엔 ‘달구지’(바퀴 두 개 마차) 한 대가 깊은 구덩이 속에 빠져 옴짝달싹 못하고 있었어요.
“아니, 짐을 이리 가득 실으면,”라며 송곳 씨가 그 옆에 서 있는 남자에게 가 말했어요. “사고가 나지 않나? 당신은 여기서 뭐하고 있소?”
“은총을 입으사,”라며 그 남자가 말했어요. “잘못될 리가 없습니다요, 제가 여기서 밀고 있음 그 분들이 도와주실 거거든요.”
사실이었어요, 곧 천사 한 분이 오시더니 그 달구지를 두 말에 연결하셨어요.
‘그 잘 됐네,’라며 송곳 씨가 생각했어요. “하지만 두 마리 말론 이 달구지를 끌어올리지 못할 걸. 적어도 네 마리 말은 있어야지, 암.”
또 다른 천사 분이 두 마리 말을 더 끌고 오셨지요.
그런데 그 천사 분이 두 말을 반대쪽에다 연결해, 결국 두 말이 달구지 앞에 연결되어 있고, 또 다른 두 말은 달구지 뒤에 연결된 형국이 되고 말았어요. 
이에 잔뜩 화딱지가 난 구둣방 주인 송곳 씨가 “이런 어설픈 일꾼들하곤,”라며 버럭 화를 내시며 발끈했어요. “일하는 꼬락서니들 하곤? 이런 식으로 달구지를 잘도 끌어 올리겠다? 이 무슨 오만함이란 말이야, 지들이 세상 다 아는 갑.”
그가 막 더 잔소리를 해대려는데, 하늘나라의 거주민들 중 한 명이 그의 목덜미를 부여잡더니 압도적인 힘으로 그를 앞쪽으로 확 밀어버렸어요.
하늘나라 정문 아래까지 내동댕이쳐진 구둣방 주인 송곳 씨가 고개를 돌려 그 달구지를 흘낏 쳐다보니, 날개를 단 네 마리 말들이 그 달구지를 하늘로 들어 올리고 있었어요.
순간 구둣방 주인 송곳 씨가 벌떡 꿈에서 깨어났지요.
“확실히 지상에서보단 하늘나라 천국이 일들은 참 가지런히 되고 있군.”라며 그가 혼잣말을 했어요. “내가 잘한 건 아니다만, 달구지 앞뒤로 말을 연결하는데 가만있을 사람이 어디 있겠냐고? 그 말들에 날개가 달린 줄 누가 알았는감? 하지만 네 다리가 벌써 있는 말에게 또 날개를 단 그 어리석음이란! 어여(어서) 일어나자, 그러지 않음 내가 잠시 한 눈 판 사이 내 집 꼬락서니가 어찌 될지 모르니까 말이야. 그나저나 참말로 재수 좋은 건, 내가 진짜로 죽었던 게 아니란 거지.”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「구둣방 주인 송곳 씨」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「구둣방 주인 송곳 씨」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter179.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



180. 샘물가에서 거위치는 아가씨



옛날 옛적에 아주 나이 많은 노파 한 명이 산들 사이에 위치한 황무지에 있는 조그마한 집에서 거위 떼와 함께 살고 있었어요.
그곳은 울창한 숲으로 둘러싸인 곳으로, 매일 아침 노파는 목다리(지팡이)를 하고서 절뚝거리며 숲으로 들어갔지요.
하지만 숲에선 무척 활동적이었답니다. 우리들이 생각하는 그 이상으로 말이죠. 적어도 그녀의 나이 대를 고려한다면요. 그녀는 자신의 거위 떼에게 줄 풀들을 모으고, 손닿는 높이에 열린 야생 열매들을 땄지요. 그러곤 그것들 모두를 등에 짊어지고 집으로 왔답니다.
그럼 다리를 짓누르는 그 무거운 짐들을 지고 어떻게 그리도 안전하게 귀가하실 수 있었을까요.
그건 그녀의 친절함 덕분이었죠, 그녀는 누구든 마주치는 사람들에게 참 호의적으로 인사를 건넸답니다.
“좋은 날이오, 시골양반, 그래 날씨 참 맑지 않소. 아! 내가 어떻게 이 풀들을 다 이고 가는지 궁금하겠지만, 누구든 저마다의 삶의 무게를 짊어지고 다니지 않소.”
그럼에도 불구하고 사람들은 길에서 그녀와 마주치는 걸 참 싫어했어요, 그래서 저 멀찍이에서 그녀가 보이면 우회 길로 돌아가곤 했죠.
특히 아들들과 같이 가던 아빠는 그녀가 옆에라도 지나가면 아이들에게 소곤거렸답니다.
“저 할망구를 조심하거라. 그녀는 장갑 속에 날카로운 발톱을 숨기고 다니는 마녀란다.”
그러던 어느 날 아침에, 잘생긴 한 젊은이가 그 숲을 지나게 되었어요.  
햇살은 맑게 비치고, 새들은 즐거이 노래하는 가운데, 시원한 산들바람이 잎사귀들을 타고 흘러, 그는 마음이 즐겁고 상쾌했답니다.
그렇게 아무도 없는 숲을 가다 불쑥하고 저기서 낫을 들고서 풀을 베며 땅에 무릎을 구부리고 않아 있는 늙은 마녀를 발견하게 된 거죠.
그녀는 이미 묵직한 짐을 짊어지고 있던 상태였는데 가까이에 야생 사과와 배들이 가득 담긴 바구니 두 개가 놓여 있지 뭐예요.
“허참, 수고가 많으십니다, 착한 어머님.”라며 그가 말했어요. “이 많은 걸 어찌 다 옮기시게요?”
“제가 다 옮겨야죠, 나리.”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “부자들이야 심부름해주는 사람들이 다 있겠지만, 시골 아낙들이야 해야지 별 수 있나요, 안 그랬다간, ‘구부정한 등을 어따 쓰게!’라는 핀잔만 듣기 십상이지요!”
그래도 그가 가지 않고 계속 서 있자, 그녀가 “왜, 도와주시려고?”라며 물었지요. “하긴 등도 곧고 다리도 멀쩡하니 이건 일도 아닐 테지. 그럼 우리 집까지만 옮겨다 주시구려, 여기서 그리 멀지 않다오. 저 언덕 너머 황야에 있는 집이라고. 금방 갈 거요.”
젊은이는 노파가 불쌍해 보여 “저희 아빠는 농부는 아니고,”라며 대꾸했어요. “부유한 백작이시랍니다. 하지만 고생하시는 걸 보니 그냥 지나칠 수 없어 제가 드리리다.”
“도와주시겠다면야,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “나야 좋지. 1시간만 걸어가면 돼, 대수로운 일도 아니잖아, 이거랑 사과 그리고 배들도 옮겨주게나?”
그렇지만 1시간을 걸어가야 된다는 말에 젊은이는 살짝 심각해져선 그냥 가려는데, 노파가 한사코 놓아주지 않고 기어이 그의 등에 꾸러미를 이게 하고 품(팔)에 두 바구니를 안기지 뭐예요.
“거봐, 가볍지.”라며 그녀가 말했어요. 
“아니, 가벼운 게 아닌데요,”라며 백작이 대답했어요. 짐이 얼마나 무거운지 그의 얼굴이 고통으로 일그러졌지요. “자갈을 담으신 거예요, 왜 이렇게 사과와 배들이 무겁죠, 마치 납덩어리 같아요! 숨도 못 쉬겠다고요.”
그가 짐을 내려놓으려하자 노파가 절대 그러지 못하게 했어요.
“쯧쯧,”라며 그녀가 조롱조로 말했어요. “젊은 양반이 뭘 그런 것도 하나 못 이고 가, 늙은 나도 잘도 옮기는데. 남자가 말을 한 번 뱉었으면 책임을 질 줄 알아야지, 발을 내딛어봐요. 여기서 마냥 있을 건 아니잖아?”
그녀가 계속 말했어요.
“자 어서. 짐 받아줄 사람 여기 아무도 없으니까.”
평지를 갈 때 그나마 참을 만 했는데, 언덕을 오를 땐, 발아래 돌멩이들이 살아있는 듯 마구 굴러 내리는 바람에, 다리에 힘이 빠져 죽을 맛이었어요.
그의 이마에선 이제 땀이 뻘뻘 흘러내리고 있었고 등줄기로는 후덥지근한 땀방울들이 소나기 오듯 흘러내렸답니다. 
“부인,”라며 그가 말했어요. “저, 더는 더 못 가겠어요. 저 좀 쉬어야겠어요.”
“여기선 안 돼,”라며 노파가 대답했어요. “쉬더라도 도착하거든 쉬어. 어여 가게나. 도착하면 좋은 일이 있을지 누가 알겠나?”
“할머니, 점점 뻔뻔해지시네요!”라고 백작이 내뱉더니 그냥 짐을 땅바닥에 팽개치려 시도해보았는데 헛수고지 뭐예요. 짐이 어찌나 등짝에 딱달라 붙어 있는지 그가 몸을 비틀고 돌려봐도 짐을 벗겨낼 수가 없었던 거예요.
노파가 그 모습을 보더니 웃더니 너무도 기분이 좋아졌는지 자신의 목다리(지팡이)를 사방으로 움직였어요.
“화내지 말아요, 나리,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “얼굴이 왜 그렇게 새빨개졌어! 천천히 짐을 옮겨봐. 집에 도착하면 좋은 선물을 준다니까 그러네.”
그러니 뭐 어쩌겠어요.
그리하여 젊은이는 자신의 운명을 받아들이고 거의 기다시피하며 노파 뒤를 따라갔답니다.
그녀는 점점 더 날쌔지는데 반해, 젊은이의 짐은 점점 더 무거워져만 갔지요.
급기야 그녀가 팔짝하고 짐 위로 뛰어올라 걸 터 앉더니 내려올 기색을 전혀 보이지 않는 바람에 젊은이는 정말 죽을 맛이었어요. 가장 뚱뚱한 시골 아낙보다도 더 무거웠다니까요.
이제 젊은이의 무릎이 와들와들 떨려와 더는 못 걸을 거 같을 때, 노파가 젊은이의 다리를 “찰짝”하고 때렸어요.
끙끙 앓으며 그가 계속 산을 올라간 결과 결국 노파의 집에 도착할 수 있었답니다. 그건 정말이지 젊은이가 쓰러지기 일보 직전에 천만 다행으로 도착한 거였지요.
노파를 본 거위들이 푸드덕 날개를 펄럭이고 목을 쭉 빼며 마중 나오더니 한 참을 꽥꽥 거렸어요.
그 뒤로 손에 막대기를 든 강하고 튼튼해 보이는 못생긴 시골 색시 한 명이 나오더니 노파를 보고 “오셨어요, 어머니.”라고 인사를 했어요. “오늘은 왜 이리 늦으셨어요, 뭔 일이라도 있으셨어요?”
“아니다, 딸애야.”라며 노파가 말했어요. “나쁜 일이 아니라, 친절한 신사양반을 만났는데 내 대신 짐을 지고 와 주시겠다지 뭐냐, 그 덕에 지친 나도 그의 등에 타고 왔지. 길도 뭐 멀지 않고, 오복하게 웃으며 왔단다, 농담을 나누며 말이다.”
마침내 노파가 짐 위에서 미끄러져 내려와 젊은이의 등짝에서 짐을 내려주고, 젊은이의 두 팔에서 바구니들도 받아주었어요. 
그리곤 노파는 고맙다는 듯 젊은이를 바라보며 말했어요.
“그래 저기 문 앞에 있는 긴 의자에 앉아 좀 쉬고 계시구려. 일을 했으니 보수는 두둑이 받아가야지, 내 크게 한 턱 쏘리다.”
그런 다음 그녀가 거위치는 아가씨보고 말했어요.
“딸애야, 너는 얼른 들어가거라, 젊은 신사양반 옆에 젊은 아가씨가 딱 붙어있는 게 아니다. 불에 기름을 부을 필요는 없지 않겠니. 그러다 그가 네게 푹 빠지기라도 하면 어쩌려고 그러니.”
백작이 그 말이 농으로 하는 말인지 진담으로 하는 말인지 알 수 없었어요.
그래서 젊은이가 생각했어요. ‘참 실없는 할머니시네. 그녀(시골아가씨)가 30살은 더 젊어진다해도 심쿵하지 않을 자신 있구만 참.’
그러는 사이 노파는 자신의 거위들이 마치 아이들이라도 되는 마냥 쓰담쓰담 해주고 귀여워해주었지요. 그런 다음 자신의 딸과 함께 집안으로 들어갔답니다.
젊은이는 너무 피곤해서 긴 의자에 드러누웠지요, 거긴 야생 사과나무 한 그루 아래의 그윽한 장소였지요.
공기는 따뜻하고 미풍이 살살 부는 게, 온 사방으로 푸른 풀잎들이 기지개를 펴고, 나물들이며, 꿀풀(백리향. 풀의 종류)이며, 천 가지 다양한 꽃들이 피어나는 가운데, 맑은 개울물이 샘물로 흘려들며 잔물결을 이는 가운데 햇살을 받아 반짝반짝 빛나고 있었어요. 흰 거위들이 앞뒤로 걸으다니거나 물에서 조용히 헤엄을 치고 있었지요.
“여긴 참 기분 좋은 장소군,”라며 그가 말했어요. “그나저나 이젠 정말 내 눈꺼풀도 무거울 만큼 너무 피곤해 잠시 잘 거 같아. 다리가 어찌나 후들거리는지 강풍이라도 불면 날아갈 거 같단 말이야, 다리가 정말 녹슨 불쏘시개(젓가락) 같아.”
그가 잠시 그렇게 눈을 붙이고 자고 있을 때, 노파가 다시 나오더니 그를 흔들어 깨웠어요.
“일어나요,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “여기서 자면 안 돼. 내가 가혹하게 대하는 게 아니라 괜히 아까운 목숨 잃을 필요 없어서 그래. 이미 부자시니 돈과 땅은 필요 없을 게고, 이거면 어떠쇼.”
그런 까닭에 그녀가 작은 책 한 권을 그의 손에 던져주었어요. 그 책은 하나의 에멜랄드(보석)를 깍아만든 거였어요. 일반 책이 아니였죠.
“조심해서 간수하게나,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “그게 자네에게 큰 행운을 가져다줄 테니.”
백작이 일어나보니 정말 푹 잔 듯 온 몸이 개운하고 기운이 흘러 넘쳤어요. 그가 노파에게 선물 고맙다는 말을 하곤 그녀의 아름다운 딸에겐 눈길 한 번 주지 않고 그 길로 길을 떠났죠.
그가 한참을 벗어났는데도 거위들의 울음소리가 따라오는 거 같았답니다.
백작은 그렇게 3일 동안을 이 미지의 황야에서 헤매여야했어요. 도무지 길이 나와야말이죠.
그런 다음에야 큰 도시에 도착할 수 있었답니다. 물론 아는 사람 한 명 없는 도시였지요. 그가 궁전으로 안내받아 가니 왕좌(의자)에 왕과 왕비가 앉아 계셨어요.
백작이 한 쪽 무릎을 꿇고는 자신의 호주머니에서 그 신기한 작은 책을 꺼내 왕의 발에 내려놓았어요.
왕비는 백작보고 일어나 그 책을 건네 달라 분부를 내렸지요.
하지만 왕비가 그 책을 열어 안을 들여다보자마자 죽은 듯 바닥에 쓰러지고 마셨어요.
백작은 그 길로 왕의 하인들에게 붙들려 감옥에 갇히고 말았죠.
나중에 눈을 뜬 왕비가 백작을 풀어주라 말한 후에야, 사람들이 백작을 풀어주었을 정도랍니다. 
왕비는 백작과만 은밀히 말씀을 나누고 싶다는 말씀을 하셨어요.
왕비만 남고 모두 물러가자, 그녀가 몹시도 흐느끼며 말했어요.
(큰따옴표→) “제 주변의 사치와 명예들이 다 무슨 소용이겠습니까. 매일 아침 눈을 뜰 때면 고퐁과 슬픔이 밀려오는 걸요. 제겐 딸이 세 명 있었지요. 그 중 막내 딸이 무척이나 예뻐 보는 사람들마다 경탄해마지 않았죠. 그 애는 눈처럼 새하얗고 사과꽃처럼 빨간 아이였어요. 게다가 머릿결에선 태양… 광선처럼 빛이 나는 아이였지요. 그 애가 울 때면, 눈에서 눈물이 떨어지는 것이 아니라, 진주와 보석들이 떨어졌지요. 그 애가 15세 때, 왕께서 세 딸애들을 왕자(의자) 앞으로 부르셨지요. 막내가 입장할 때, 마치 해가 떠오른 줄 알고, 모든 이들이 황홀하게 쳐다보던 게 엊그제 같은데!

(아래의 글은 왕비의 회상부분임. 읽기 쉽게 임의로 문단을 여러 번 나눔)

그때 왕께서 말했지요.
‘내 딸들아, 내가 언제 갈지 모르겠다만, 난 오늘 내 사후에 줄 유산을 결정하려한다. 너희 모두 나를 사랑하니, 너희들 중 나를 가장 사랑하는 애에게 많은 몫을 주마.’
딸들은 하나같이 아빠를 가장 사랑한다고 말했지요.
‘말로 표현해다오,’라며 왕께서 말했어요. ‘그래 얼마만큼 나를 사랑한다는 거니, 얼마만큼?’
큰딸이 말했어요.
‘가장 달콤한 설탕만큼 아빠를 사랑해요.’
둘째가 말했어요.
‘제가 가진 가장 예쁜 드레스만큼이나 아빠를 사랑해요.’
하지만 막내딸은 말이 없었죠.
그러자 아빠가 말했어요.
‘그래 너, 내가 가장 사랑하는 막내야, 넌 나를 얼마만큼 사랑하니?’
‘알 수 없어요, 비교할 수 있는 상대가 없는 걸요.’
하지만 아빠는 ‘사물에 빗대어 말해 달라’고 우기셨죠.
그래서 막내가 마침내 말했어요.
‘소금 없이는 가장 맛난 음식도 제 맛이 안 난다 들었어요, 그러니 저는 아빠를 소금만큼 사랑해요.’
그 소리를 들은 왕이 역정을 내시며 말했어요.
‘나를 그깟 소금만큼만 사랑한다는 네게 소금의 가치만큼만 보상을 주겠노라.’ 
그러더니 아빠는 두 언니들에게 왕국을 나눠주고, 소금 한 포자기를 가져오게 해 막내딸의 등에 이게 했지요. 게다가 왕께선 두 하인들을 시켜 막내딸을 야생 숲으로 데려가게 했답니다.
저희 모두는 막내를 위해 빌고 기도했지요. 하지만 왕의 노여움은 가실 기미를 보이지 않았어요. 저희를 떠나면 막내가 어찌나 울어대던지요! 온 도로가 그 애의 눈에서 흘러내린 진주로 흩뿌려졌답니다. 그 후 왕도 노여움이 가라앉아 사람을 보내 온 숲을 탐색해 그 가련한 아이를 찾아오게 했지만 모두 허사였어요. 아무도 그 애를 찾지 못했거든요. 들짐승에게 잡아 먹혔을 생각을 하니 역장이 무너져 내려 참을 수가 없답니다. 아니, 그 애가 아직 살아있을 거라 제 스스로에게 다짐하고 또 다짐해보았지만 위로가 되질 않아요. 혹 동굴 속에 살고 있지 않을지, 혹 동정심이 많은 사람을 만나 기거하고 있지 않을지. 그런데 당신이 나타나 건네준 작은 에메랄드 책을 열자마자 그 속에 진주 하나가 있지 뭐예요, 그건 제 딸애의 눈에서 흘러내리곤 하던 바로 그 진주와 같은 종류의 진주였답니다. 이제 제 마음을 휘저은 광경이 그 애란 걸 당신도 아셨으니, 말씀해주세요, 당신은 이 진주를 어디서 얻으신 건가요.”(←큰따옴표 끝)

(↑여기까지, 왕비의 회상 부분 끝)

백작은 숲에서 어느 노파를 만나 그 책을 건네받게 되었다고 말했어요. 
“그 노파는 무척 기이한 여자로, 아무래도 마녀 같았습니다. 하지만 공주님에 관한 소식은 어디서도 전해 듣거나 눈으로 확인한 적은 없습니다.”
왕과 왕비는 그 노파를 찾아나서기로 결심했어요. 진주가 있었던 곳이 거기니 딸애의 소식도 전해들을 수 있을 거라 믿었던 거지요.
한편 그 시각, 노파는 홀로 물레에 앉아 실을 만들고 있었어요.
땅거미(어둑어둑함)가 진 후였죠. 난로에서 장작들이 타며 부족한 빛을 내주고 있었죠.
곧 밖에서 소리가 들리더니, 거위들이 풀밭에서 집으로 돌아왔는지 한동안 꽥꽥거리는 소리들이 가득했죠.
곧바로 딸이 들어왔어요.
하지만 노파는 수고했다는 말 한 마디 딸애에게 건네지 않았어요, 그저 고개만 살짝 흔들어보였을 뿐이죠.
딸도 노파 옆에 앉더니 물레를 잡고 어느 젊은 아가씨마냥 민첩하게 실을 꼬기 시작했어요.
그들 둘은 그렇게 두 시간을 앉아 실을 만들었지만 말 한 마디 교환하지 않았죠.
마침내 창문에서 뭔가가 바스락거리는 소리가 나더니, 불같이 빛나는 두 눈이 방안을 엿보고 있었어요. 
그건 늙은 올빼미였어요, 그 올빼미가 “부엉!”이라며 세 번 울었어요.
노파가 그쪽을 힐끗 보더니 말했어요.
“그래, 내 딸아, 나가 일볼 때가 됐나보구나.”
딸이 일어나더니 밖으로 나가는데, 대체 그녀는 어디로 가려는 걸까요?
풀밭을 넘고 쭉쭉 나아가더니 골짜기로 들어서네요.
그녀가 마침내 샘물가에 도착했어요. 그 샘물가에는 오래된 떡갈나무 세 그루가 서 있었어요.
그 동안 둥근 달이 떠올라 온 산을 비추고 있었지요. 어찌나 달빛이 밝은지 바늘도 찾을 수 있을 정도였답니다.
그녀가 얼굴을 뒤덮고 있던 가죽을 벗더니 샘 옆에 내려놓고서 몸을 씻기 시작했어요.
다 씻고 나자 그녀가 샘물에 벗어놓은 그 가죽을 살짝 젖이더니 풀밭 위에 내려놓았어요. 그래서 달빛을 가득 머금은 가죽이 하얗게 빛났답니다. 그러면서 서서히 건조되어 갔지요.
하지만 달빛에 드러난 그녀의 모습이 어찌나 아름답던지!
세상에 이런 변신이 있었던가요!
정체가 드러나면서 마치 태양빛줄기처럼 촬랑거리며 온 몸을 감싸며 흘러내리는 그녀의 황금빛 머릿결이란.
하늘에 있는 별도 지금 그녀의 눈빛보단 반짝이지 않았고, 빨간 사과꽃도 지금 그녀의 두 뺨보다 보드랍게 빨갈 수 없었죠.
살갗이 희고 금발의 아가씨는 하지만 슬펐답니다. 그녀는 주저앉아 펑펑 울었어요. 두 눈에서 눈물이 차례차례 흘러 그녀의 긴 머리카락들을 타고 땅으로 흘러내렸어요.
만약 가까이에 있던 나뭇가지에서 바스락거리며 딱 부러지는 소리가 들리지 않았다면, 그녀는 그렇게 거기 한참을 앉아 있었을 거예요.
그녀가 벌떡 일어났어요, 마치 사냥꾼이 쏜 총에 화들짝 놀라 달라나려는 노루 마냥. 
때마침 달도 거무스름한 구름에 감추어진 상태라, 아가씨는 즉시 자신의 낡은 가죽을 다시 쓰고는 바람에 꺼진 촛불 마냥 사라져버렸어요.
그녀는 사시나무 떨 듯 와들와들 떨면서 뛰어 집으로 돌아왔어요. 
문지방에 서 있는 노파를 보고 아가씨가 무슨 일이 있었는지를 막 말하려하자, 노파는 상냥히 웃어보이더니 말했어요.
“벌써 다 안단다.”
노파는 아가씨를 방으로 데리고 들어가 새 장작으로 불을 피웠어요.
하지만 노파는 다시 앉아 실을 만드는 것이 아니라 이번엔 빗자루를 가져와 바닥을 쓸고 닦기 시작했어요.
“항시 깨끗이 하고 단정해야한다.”라며 노파가 아가씨에게 말했어요.
“하지만, 어머니,”라며 처녀가 말했어요. “왜 갑자기 이 늦은 시각에 청소세요? 누가 오시나요?”
“때가 되면 너도 알게 된단다, 그래 지금이 몇 시인지는 아니?”라며 할머니가 말했어요.
“아직 밤 12시는 아니에요,”라며 처녀가 대답했어요. “하지만 밤 11시는 벌써 지났어요.”
“기억하니,”라며 노파가 계속 말했어요. “3년 전 이맘때 네가 여기 온 것을? 그 시간이 다 되었단다, 우린 함께 더 머물 수 없어.”
아가씨는 깜짝 놀라 말했어요.
“아아! 어머니, 저를 버리시게요? 저보고 어디로 가라고요? 저는 친구도 없고 돌아갈 집도 없는 걸요. 항상 어머님이 시키는 것을 해 왔고, 어머니도 저를 항상 예뻐하시더니, 이제 저보고 어디로 가라고요.”
노파는 대체 무슨 일인지를 아가씨에게 말하려 들지 않았어요.
“나도 여기 더 있을 수 없단다,”라며 노파가 아가씨에게 말했어요. “그래도 떠나기 전에, 이 집과 응접실을 말끔하게 하고 내가 방해가 되지 않으려는 거뿐이란다. 넌 걱정 말거라, 넌 이제 안락한 집과 지붕을 가지게 될 게다, 그동안 내게서 일한 보수도 두둑이 받게 될 테고 말이다.”
“대체 무슨 일인데요,”라며 처녀가 계속해서 애타게 말했어요. 
“내 다시 말하마, 난 더는 방해가 되지 않으려한단다. 그러니 너도 더는 내게 말을 시키지 말고, 네 방에 가 있거라, 들어가서 네 얼굴에서 가죽을 벗고, 여기 왔을 때 입었던 비단 가운(옷)을 꺼내 입고 있으려무나, 거기서 내가 다시 부르러 갈 때까지 기다리고 있으면 된다.”
자 여기서 다시 한 번 왕과 왕비에 대해 얘기해야하겠네요. 그들은 궁전을 나서 황야에 산다는 노파를 찾아나섰답니다.
그들과 함께 하던 백작은 밤에 그만 숲에서 그들과 떨어져 혼자 걷게 되고 말았지 뭐예요.
다음날 그가 ‘이 길이 맞는 거 같은데.’라며 나아가고 또 나아가다보니, 어둠이 깔리는 바람에, 그는 나무에 올라갔답니다. 일단 밤을 거기서 보내고, 길을 잃지 않기 위해서였죠.
달빛이 사방을 찬란히 비추는 가운데 누군가의 그림자가 산 아래로 내려오는 게 보였어요.
손에 지팡이를 안 든 걸로 보아 아무래도 거위치는 아가씨 같았죠. 그녀라면 백작도 노파의 집에서 한 번 본 적이 있었으니까요.
“오호,”라며 그가 소리쳤어요. “저기 그녀가 오는데, 이제 마녀들 중 한 명을 찾았으니 다른 마녀도 금방 찾을 수 있겠는걸!”
하지만 샘물가에 도착한 그 아가씨가 가죽을 벗고 몸을 씻으며 황금 머릿결을 촬랑 하고 온 몸에 드리웠을 때 백작이 어찌나 놀랐던 지요. 정말이지 이토록 아름다운 여인은 백작도 단 한 번도 본 적이 없었어요.
백작은 숨도 거의 못 쉰 채 고개를 나뭇잎 사이로부터 까짓것 내밀고서 그녀를 바라보고 있었죠.
그러다 너무 멀리까지 기대는 바람에, 의도치 않게 나뭇가지가 딱 하고 갑자기 부러지고 말았죠. 그 순간 아가씨가 가죽 속으로 미끄러져 들어가더니 노루처럼 달아나고 말았죠. 때마침 달도 구름에 가려져 백작도 그녀를 시야에서 놓치고 말았답니다.
그녀가 사라지자마자 백작은 나무에서 내려와 서둘러 그녀의 발자취를 쫓아가기 시작했지요.
멀리 못가 해뜨기 전의 여명이 이는 가운데, 두 사람의 그림자가 풀밭위로 드리워졌지요.
그건 멀찍이에서 빛을 내고 있던 노파의 작은 집을 보고 가고 있던 왕과 왕비였지요.
백작은 자신이 샘물가에서 본 경이로운 광경을 그들에게 말했죠. 그들(왕과 왕비)은 그게 잃어버린 딸이라는 걸 의심하지 않았답니다.
그들이 크게 기뻐하며 계속 나아갔더니 곧 그 작은 집이 나왔어요.
거위들이 집 주변을 둥글게 앉아 있는데 모두들 날개에 고개를 파묻고서 자고 있네요. 그래서 손님이 와도 거위들은 꿈쩍도 않았답니다.
왕과 왕비가 창문을 통해 안을 들여다보니, 노파는 차분히 앉아서 실을 만들며 연신 고개를 끄떡이며 이쪽을 바라보진 않고 있었어요.
내부는 참 깨끗했어요. 마치 발에 먼지를 묻히고 다니지 않는다는 안개 요정들이 사는 곳 같았죠.
하지만 딸아이는 보이지 않았죠.
그들이 한참을 그렇게 바라만보고 있다 결국 용기를 내 조용히 창문을 노크했죠.
노파는 이미 그들이 올 것을 예상하고 있었어요.
노파가 일어나더니 차분하고 상냥히 소리쳤어요. 
“들어오세요… 오실 줄을 알았답니다.”
그들이 방에 들어서자, 노파가 말했어요.
“긴 발걸음을 하셨겠지만, 부당하게 쫓겨난 아이가 보낸 3년에 비하면 길다 말할 수 없지요. 참 착하고 사랑스러운 당신들의 딸아이 말입니다. 그 애를 잘 있답니다. 지난 3년 동안 거위를 돌보며 지냈죠. 거위들과 있다 보니 나쁜 걸 하나도 안 배웠지요. 그 덕에 그녀의 순수한 마음씨가 보존될 수 있었답니다. 게다가 당신들은 지난 3년 동안 충분히 비참하게 벌을 받으셨지요.”
그런 다음 노파는 방으로 들어가 외쳤어요.
“나오려무나, 사랑하는 딸아.”
그 후 즉시 문이 열리고, 공주님이 자신의 비단 의상(옷)을 입고서 앞으로 나왔어요. 황금 머릿결과 빛나는 눈망울을 한 그녀는 마치 천국에서 방금 도착한 천사 같았답니다.
그녀가 아빠 엄마에게 걸어가 목을 감싸 안더니 입맞춤을 해드렸어요.
도대체 이거 외에 더 무엇이 필요했겠어요, 모두들 기쁨에 펑펑 울었답니다.
젊은 백작이 그들 가까이에 있었기에 곧 그를 발견한 아가씨의 얼굴이 그녀 자신도 모르게 ‘서양 장미’(원문→모스 로즈. 사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/aYlPEZ )마냥 빨갛게 타올랐답니다.
왕이 말했지요.
“사랑하는 얘야, 난 이미 왕국을 줘버렸단다. 너에겐 뭘 주면 되겠니?”
“그 애는 아무것도 필요 없답니다.”라며 노파가 말했어요. “아빠 덕분에 그동안 그 애가 흘렸던 눈물들을 제가 줄 테니까요. 그건 귀한 진주들이랍니다. 바다에서 나는 그 어떤 진주보다 더 값진 보석이죠, 자그마치 당신의 온 왕국보다 더 값나가는 보석들이랍니다. 그리고 그동안의 노고에 대한 보수로 제가 이제 이 예쁜 집을 그 애에게 줄 거랍니다.” 
그 말을 남긴 노파가 시야에서 사라져버렸어요.
그때 벽들이 살짝 덜커덕덜커덕 거려, 왕과 왕비가 주변을 둘러보니, 그 작고 예쁜 집이 어느새 화려한 궁전으로 변해 있고, 궁전의 식탁엔 온갖 음식들이 차려져 있고, 하인들이 연신 오고가고 있었어요.
그래요, 얘기는 여기서 좀 더 진행돼야해요, 하지만 제게 이 이야기를 들려주신 저희 할머니께서도 기억력이 예전만 못하셔서요. 나머지 부분은 잊고 말았다네요.
아름다운 공주님이 그 백작 분과 결혼했으리라 저는 믿어요. 그들은 궁전에 다 같이 함께 살며 하느님이 부르실 때까지 행복하게 살았을 거랍니다. 
그럼 그 작은 오두막에서 키우던 눈처럼 새하얀 그 거위들은, 노파가 보호하고 있던 참한 아가씨들이었을까요? 물론 그럴 리는 없겠지만 그랬다면 그녀들도 모두 원래 사람의 모습으로 돌아와 젊은 왕비님의 시녀들로 그 궁전에 머물렀을 거예요. 물론 정확한 건 아니지만 왠지 그랬을 거 같은 생각이 들어서요.
그럼 자, 한 가지 더, 확실히 노파는 마녀는 아니었답니다. 여러분들도 생각하듯 아마도, 착한 마음씨를 지닌 여자 마법사였을 테지요.
네 맞아요, 그녀는 막내공주님의 생일날에 도착해 그녀에게 눈물 대신 진주를 눈물로 흘리는 선물을 주신 바로 그 분이시랍니다.
요즘 같은 세상에 그리된다면, 가난한 사람들도 금방 부자가 될 텐데 말이죠.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「샘물가에서 거위치는 아가씨」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「샘물가에서 거위치는 아가씨」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter180.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



181. 이브의 다양한 자녀들



아담과 이브가 에덴동산에서 내쫓겼을 때, 그들은 불모(열매가 자라지 않는)의 땅에 집을 한 채 짓고 땀 흘려 일해 양식을 구해야했지요.
아담이 땅을 파 뒤집고 이브가 실을 만들었지요.
매년 이브는 아이 한 명씩을 나았답니다. 그들은 서로 닮지 않았어요, 어떤 애는 사랑스럽지만 어떤 애는 못생겼어요.
상당한 시간이 지난 후, 하느님께서 천사를 보내시어 “손수 방문해 어찌 사는지 보겠노라”라고 말을 전해왔어요.
하느님이 오신다니 이브는 너무도 기뻐서 집 청소를 부지런히 하고 꽃들로 꾸미고 바닥에 갈대를 흩뿌렸어요.
그런 다음 그녀는 자신의 자녀들 중 예쁜 아이들만 데려와 세수를 해주고 목욕을 해며 머리를 빗어주고 깨끗한 옷을 입히고 하느님 앞에서 정중하고 예의바르게 행동해야한다고 단단히 일러주었답니다.
그래서 아이들은 하느님 앞에서 예의바르게 인사를 하고 손을 내밀며 그 분의 질문에도 공손하고 똘똘하게 대답하기로 다짐을 했지요.
하지만 못생긴 아이들은 눈에 띄지 않게 했지요.
한 애는 건초 밑에 숨기고, 또 다른 애는 지붕 아래에 숨기고, 세 번째 아이는 밀짚 속에 숨기고, 네 번째 아이는 난로 속에 숨기고, 다섯 번째 아니는 다락방에 숨기고, 여섯 번째 아니는 물통 밑에 숨기고, 일곱 번째 아이는 포도주 통 아래쪽 기슭에 숨기고, 여덟 번째 아이는 털외투 밑에 숨기고, 아홉 번째 아이와 열 번째 아이는 옷감 밑에 숨겼죠. 그녀가 항상 아이들의 옷을 만드니까요. 그리고 열한 번째 아이와 열두 번째 아이는 그녀가 아이들의 신발을 만들려고 잘라놓은 가죽 밑에 숨겼어요.
그녀가 막 준비를 끝내자마자, 현관문에서 똑똑 노크소리가 들렸어요.
아담이 틈새로 내다보니 하느님께서 서 계셨어요.
아담이 문을 정중히 열어드리자, 하느님 아버지께서 입장을 하셨어요.
거기에 일렬로 예쁜 아이들이 서 있다 하느님을 보고 인사를 하며 손들을 내밀며 무릎을 꿇었지요.
하느님께서 그들을 축복해주시기 시작했답니다.
첫 번째 아이에게 손을 얹으시며 말하길,
“너는 강력한 왕이 되리라.”
그리고 두 번째 아이에게 손을 얹으시며,
“너는 왕자가 되리라.”
세 번째 아이에게는,
“너는 백작이 되리라.”
네 번째 아이에게는,
“너는 기사가 되리라.”
다섯 번째 아이에게는,
“넌 귀족이 되리라.”
여섯 번째 아이에게는,
“넌 시민이 되리라.”
일곱 번째 아이에게는,
“넌 상인이 되리라.”
여덟 번째 아이에게는,
“넌 학자가 되리라.”
라고 말하며 하느님께서는 모든 아이들에게 크나큰 축복을 내려주셨지요.
하느님이 너무도 온화하시고 호의적인 것에 감명을 받은 이브가 생각했어요.
“내 비호감인 자녀들도 데려와 축복을 받게 해야겠다.”
그래서 그녀가 달려가 아이들을 건초에서, 밀짚에서, 난로에서, 그 밖에 기타 등등 그녀가 숨겨놓았던 애초 장소에서 아이들을 다 데려왔지요.
그 아이들은 거칠고 더럽고 꾀죄죄했고 거무스름했어요.
하느님이 미소를 머금으시고 그 애들을 내려다보시며 말씀하셨어요.
“너희들에게도 축복을 내려주마.”
하느님은 첫 번째 아이에게 손을 얹으시며 말했어요.
“넌 농부가 되리라.”
두 번째 아이에게는,
“넌 어부가 되리라.”
세 번째 아이에게는,
“넌 대장장이가 되리라.”
네 번째 아이에게는,
“넌 무두장이(동물 가죽에서 털과 기름을 뽑고 부드럽게 만드는 직업)가 되리라.”
다섯 번째 아이에게는,
“넌 ‘베’(=천=피륙) 짜는 사람이 되리라.”
여섯 번째 아이에게는,
“넌 구두 만드는 사람이 되리라.”
일곱 번째 아이에게는,
“넌 재봉사(옷 만드는 사람)가 되리라.”
여덟 번째 아이에게는,
“넌 도예가(그릇 만드는 사람)가 되리라.”
아홉 번째 아이에게는,
“넌 마차 만드는 사람이 되리라.”
열 번째 아이에게는,
“넌 선원이 되리라.”
열한 번째 아이에게는,
“넌 심부름꾼이 되리라.”
열두 번째 아이에게는,
“넌 평생 하인이 되리라.”
라고 말씀해주셨어요.  
이 말들을 듣고 있던 이브가 말했어요.
“하느님, 어찌 이리도 차별을 하십니까! 얘네들 모두 제가 나은 자식들인데, 은총을 주시려면 똑같이 주셔야지요.” 
하지만 하느님께서 대답하셨답니다.
“이브야, 너는 모르는구나. 세상에 네 자녀들 모두가 꼭 필요하니라. 그들 모두가 왕이요 군주들이면, 누가 곡식을 키우고 ‘타작’(곡식 줄기에서 낟알을 때어냄)을 하고 가루로 만들어 빵을 굽겠느냐? 대장장이는 누가하며, 베 짜는 사람은 누가할 것이며, 목수, ‘벽돌공’(집 지을 때 벽돌을 쌓아 벽을 만드는 사람), 노동자와 남녀재봉사는 누가 할 것이겠느냐? 각자가 제 영역에서 할 도리가 있고 그를 통해 다른 이들을 지탱해주며 한 몸의 손발처럼 사는 거니라.” 
그제야 이브도 깨달은 바가 있어 대답했어요.
“아아, 하느님, 용서해주세요. 제가 너무 경솔히 말씀드렸나이다. 당신의 거룩함이 제 자식들과 함께하게 해주소서.”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「이브의 다양한 자녀들」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「이브의 다양한 자녀들」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter181.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



182. 못 속의 물의 요정
(게르만 신화 속, 물의 요정인 ‘닉세’를 의미함)






옛날 옛적에 물방앗간 주인이 아내와 함께 더없이 만족하며 살고 있었더래요.
그들은 돈도 있고 땅도 있었지요. 그리고 해가 더할수록 재산이 불어났지요.
그러다 밤도둑 같은 불행이 닫쳐, 재산이 나날이 줄어들더니 해가 지날수록 눈에 확 띠게 줄고 또 줄더니 마침내는 살고 있는 물방앗간까지 남의 손에 넘어가고야 말았지요.
너무도 상심한 남자가 하루 노동을 마친 후 자리에 누었지만, 어디 잠이 와야 말이죠, 그래서 침대에서 늘 뒤척거렸죠. 너무도 근심스러워서요.
어느 날 새벽 그가 일어나 밖으로 나왔어요. 바깥바람을 쐬면 울쩍한 마음이 좀 가라앉을까 해서요.
햇살이 비칠 때쯤 물방아용… 둑 위를 건너는데, 연못(물방앗간에 딸려 있는 연못) 속에서 잔물결이 이는 소리가 들렸어요.
그가 고개를 돌려 보니 한 아리따운 아가씨가 물 위오 가지런히 솟아나와 있지 뭐예요.
그녀의 긴 머릿결은 어깨 위를 다 덮고도 부드러운 손을 지나 양 옆으로 길게 드리워지며 새하얀 몸을 가려주고 있었지요.
그는 곧 그녀가 못(연못) 속의 물의 요정인 ‘닉세’(독일어 발음임. 게르만 신화 속에 나오는 물의 요정. 물○신이라는 나쁜 의미도 있음)임을 알아차리고 기겁을 한 나머지 도망쳐야할지 아니면 거기 서 있어야할지 몰라 갈팡질팡하고 있었어요.
그때 물의 요정 닉세의 달콤한 목소리가 들려왔어요. 그녀는 그의 이름을 부르며 “왜 그리 슬픈 표정이신가요?”라고 물어왔어요.
물방앗간 주인도 처음엔 꿀 먹은 벙어리인양 서 있다, 너무도 상냥한 그녀의 목소리를 듣고 마음이 좀 풀려 “전만 해도 재산이며 생활이며 다 행복했는데, 요즘은 너무도 가난해져 사는 게 사는 거 같지 않고 어찌하면 좋을지 모르겠습니다요.”라고 말했어요.
“걱정 마요,”라며 물의 요정 닉세가 대답했어요. “제가 당신을 예전 부자였을 때보다 더 부유하고 행복하게 만들어 드릴테니까요, 다만 하나만 약속해주셔야 해요, 당신 집에서 방금 막 태어난 어린 것을 제게 주신다는 약속 말이에요.”
‘그야 뭐,’라며 물방앗간 주인은 생각했어요. ‘기껏 해봤자 새끼 강아지나 고양이밖에 더 있겠어?’
그래서 그는 그녀가 바라는 대로 해주겠다 약조하고 말았죠.
물의 요정 닉세가 다시 물속으로 내려갔어요.
그렇게 마음의 위로를 받아 기분이 산뜻해진 그가 서둘러 물방앗간으로 돌아왔답니다.
그가 아직 문을 들어서지 않았을 때, 별안간 하녀가 집밖으로 뛰어나오며 기쁨에 겨워 소리쳤어요. 
“세상에 마님께서 아드님을 출산하셨어요.”
너무도 충격을 받은 물방앗간 주인은 경직된 채 서 있었지요. 교활한 물의 요정 닉세가 이걸 알고서 그를 속였던 게 너무도 분명했기 때문이죠.
머리가 온통 뒤죽박죽이 된 채 그가 아내의 침대 맡으로 갔더니 아내가 말했어요.
“참한 아가를 보고서도 왜 반기지 않으세요?”
그가 오늘 있었던 일을 그녀에게 말해주었어요. 그리고 자신이 물의 요정 닉세에게 무슨 약속을 해주고 왔는지도요.
“원 세상에, 지 자식을 잃는 마당에,”라며 그가 덧붙였어요. “세상 부와 성공이 뭔 소용이 있담?”
기쁨을 함께 나누기 위해 그 자리에 모인 모든 친척들도 말문이 막힌 건 마찬가지였지요.
한편 그러는 사이에도 성공이 다시 물방앗간 주인의 집에 찾아왔어요.
그가 시작하는 모든 일들마다 대박을 터뜨려 금고가 차고 또 찼지요. 마치 돈이 돈을 굴리듯 말이예요.
오래지않아 그는 예전보다 훨씬 더 큰 부자가 되었어요.
하지만 그게 어디 기쁘기만 한 일인가요, 물의 요정 닉세과 한 거래가 한시도 그의 영혼을 놓지 않고 있는데요.
그는 연못을 지날 때마다 뜨끔했지요, 혹시라도 그녀가 다시 올라와 자신과 한 약속을 말할까봐서요.
그래서 그는 아이보고는 절대 물 가까이도 못 가게 했어요.
“조심하거라,”라며 그가 아들에게 말했어요. “네가 물에 손이라도 닿게 되면 그 즉시 손이 솟아나와 너를 끌고 들어가 버릴 거란다.”
하지만 1년이 지나고 또 다른 1년이 지나고 그렇게 세월이 지나도록 물의 요정 닉세는 모습을 드러내지 않았어요. 그래서 물방앗간 주인도 어느 정도는 안심하기에 이르렀지요.
소년은 무럭무럭 자라 이제 어엿한 젊은이가 되어 어느 사냥꾼 밑에서 사냥술을 배우게 되었어요.
모든 기술을 배운 다음 그도 훌륭한 사냥꾼이 되어, 마을 ‘영주’(땅의 주인)에게 봉사하게 되었지요.
그 마을엔 또한 아름답고 착한 마음씨를 지닌 처녀도 살고 있었는데, 사냥꾼 젊은이를 마음에 들어했답니다.
그래서 주인(영주)이 이 사실을 알고는 사냥꾼에게 작은 집을 한 채 마련해주었지요. 그리하여 둘은 결혼해 평온하고 행복하게 살았지요. 서로 진심으로 사랑을 하였으니까요.
그러던 어느 날 그 사냥꾼이 노루를 추격하던 중이었어요. 동물이 숲에서 뛰어나가 드넓은 들판으로 들어서자 그가 한 방을 쏘아 맞추었지요.
그러다 그도 인식하지 못하는 사이에 그만 위험천만한 바로 그 물방앗간 옆 연못에 들어서고 말았어요.
그가 노루의 창자를 빼낸 다음 물가로 가 피 묻은 두 손을 씻으려고 몸을 숙이는데, 순식간에 물의 요정 닉세가 올라와 팔을 벌려 그를 끌어 앉곤 함께 물결 아래로 들어가고 말았어요. 물결들이 그 위를 덮었지요.
밤이 되도록 사냥꾼이 돌아오지 않자 그의 아내는 놀라기 시작했어요.
그녀는 남편을 찾으러 나섰지요, 게다가 종종 남편을 물의 요정 닉세의 덫으로부터 지켜야하며 절대 그를 물방앗간 옆 연못 근처에 가게 해선 안 된다는 말을 들어오던 차라, 그녀는 벌써 무슨 일이 생긴 지 의심이 들던 차였어요.
그녀가 서둘러 물가로 가보았어요, 하지만 거기 물가엔 사냥 주머니만 덩그러니 놓여 있는 거예요, 이로써 남편에게 불행이 닫친 게 확실했지요.
그녀는 슬픔에 겨워 비탄해하며 손을 쥐어짜며 사랑하는 이의 이름을 불러보았지만 헛수고였어요.
그녀가 연못 맞은편 쪽으로 가 남편의 이름을 다시 불러보았어요. 그리고 그녀는 물의 요정 닉세에게 거친 단어를 사용해가며 욕도 해보았지만 들려오는 대답은 하나도 없었어요.
수면은 고요한 채 그대로인 가운데 초승달만이 꾸준히 그녀를 지지해주고 있었지요.
가련한 아내는 그 연못을 떠나지 못했어요.
급한 마음에 연못 주위를 돌고 또 돌기만 했지요, 한시도 쉬지 못하고서요, 때론 차부하게, 때론 비명을 내지르며, 때론 흐느껴 울면서요.
마침내 그녀의 기운이 다해 땅 바닥에 쓰러져 그대로 깊은 잠에 빠져들고 말았어요.
곧 꿈을 그녀를 덮쳤지요.
그녀는 갈망하며 큰 바위들 사이를 오르고 있었어요, 가시들과 잔가지들이 그녀의 발에 상처를 내고 있었지요. 비가 얼굴을 때렸고요, 바람이 그녀의 긴 머리카락들을 사방으로 흩날리고 있었어요.
그녀가 정상에 도착하니, 앞서와 전혀 다른 광경이 펼쳐졌어요. 하늘은 푸르고 대기(공기)는 부드럽고 땅은 완만하게 아래로 경사져 있었지요. 푸른(녹색) 풀밭 위로 다채로운 꽃들이 피어있는 가운데 예쁘장한 오두막 한 채가 서 있었어요.
그녀가 그리로 가 문을 열어보니, 새하얀 머릿결을 가진 나이 든 여인이 친절히 손짓하며 부르고 있었어요.
그 순간 가련한 아내가 깨고 말았어요. 날은 이미 새벽이었지요, 그녀는 꿈대로 해보기로 결심했어요.
그녀가 산을 오르고 또 올랐어요.
모든 게 그녀가 꿈에서 본 그대로였지요.
나이 든 여인이 그녀를 상냥하게 맞이해주며 앉으라며 의자를 가리켜주었어요.
“불행은 만난 게로구나,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “내 외딴 오두막을 찾은 걸 보니.”
눈물범벅이 된 아내가 자신에게 닫친 일들을 말해주었지요.
“마음을 가라앉히거라,”라며 나이 든 여인이 말했어요. “내가 도울 수 있을 게다. 여기 황금 빚을 네게 주마. 보름달이 뜰 때까지 기다렸다 그 연못으로 가 물가에 앉아 네 길고 검은 머릿결들을 이 빚으로 빗으려무나. 그걸 다하고 나면, 그 빚을 기슭에 내려놓거라, 그럼 무슨 일이 일어날 건지를 보게 될 거란다.”
아내는 집으로 돌아왔어요, 하지만 때는 초승달이라 보름달이 뜰 때까지의 시간이 참 느리게 흘러갔지요.
마침내 둥근 달덩이가 하늘에 뜨자, 그녀가 물방앗간 옆 그 연못으로 가 앉은 다음 그 황금 빚으로 자신의 길고 검은 머릿결을 빚었어요. 그걸 다 마친 다음 그녀가 물가에 빚을 내려놓았지요.
오래지않아 연못 깊은 곳에서 움직임이 일더니, 큰 물결이 솟구쳐 기슭으로 흘려 내리더니 빚을 품고 돌아갔어요.
빚이 바닥까지 가라앉자, 수면이 갈라지며 사냥꾼의 고개가 솟구쳐나왔어요.
그는 아무런 말도 하지 않았지만 자신의 아래를 간절히 바라보고 있었어요.
그와 동시에 두 번째 큰 물결이 일더니 남편의 머리를 뒤덮어버렸어요.
그게 다였지요, 이후 연못은 전처럼 차분하기만 했어요. 보름달이 그 안을 비추는 거 외엔 더는 아무런 변화가 없었어요.
상심에 겨운 아내가 귀가했지요. 하지만 또다시 오두막 속 그 노파를 찾아가는 꿈을 꾸고 말았답니다. 
다음날 아침 그녀가 다시 출발해 자신의 비애(슬픔)를 현명한 여인에게 토로했어요(불평했어요).
나이 든 여인이 이번엔 그녀에게 황금 피리를 주며 말했어요.
“보름달이 다시 뜰 때까지 기다렸다 이 피리를 들고 가 연못 위로 아름다운 선율을 불어보거라. 그걸 다 마친 다음 모래 위에 내려놓으면, 그 뒤 뭔 일이 벌어지나 볼 수 있을 거란다.”
아내가 노파의 말대로 했어요.
피리를 모래에 내려놓자마자 연못 깊은 곳이 시끄러워지더니 큰 물결이 솟구치며 피리를 삼켜가 버렸지요.
그 즉시 수면이 갈라지며, 이번엔 남편의 고개뿐만이 아니라 몸의 절반이 솟구쳐 나왔어요.
그가 아내를 갈망하며 두 팔을 뻗자, 두 번째 큰 물결이 일더니 그를 감싸 아래로 도로 데려가 버렸어요.
“아아, 이게 다 무슨 소용이람?”라며 불행한 아내가 말했어요. “사랑하는 이를 보자마자 도로 빼앗기고 말았는데!”
또다시 절망에 겨워하는데, 오두막 속 할머니를 찾아가는 세 번째 꿈을 꾸게 되었답니다.
그녀가 길을 떠나 찾아가자, 현명한 여인이 이번엔 황금 물레를 주며 조언해주었어요.
“아직 다해본 건 아니란다, 이번에도 보름달이 뜰 때까지 기다리렴, 그런 다음 이 물레를 가지고 기슭에 앉은 다음 실 꾸러미가 다 차도록 실을 만들려무나, 그걸 다 마치고 나면, 물레는 물 가까이에 두렴, 그럼 뭔 일이 일어나나 보게 될 거란다.”
아내는 할머니가 말한 그래로 따랐어요.
보름달이 모습을 드러내자마자, 그녀는 그 황금 물레를 기슭으로 가 아마(아마 껍질의 섬유로 실을 만듦)를 다 사용할 때까지 실을 부지런히 만들었답니다. 실 꾸러미가 다 차도록 실을 만들었지요.
물레를 기슭에 두자마자 연못 깊숙한 곳에서부터 전에 없던 난폭한 소용돌이가 일더니 거센 물결이 솟구치며 물레를 감싸 가져가버렸어요.
그 즉시 남편의 머리와 몸 전체가 회오리 속에서 공중으로 솟구쳐올랐어요.
그가 재빨리 기슭으로 뛰어내리며 아내의 손을 잡고 도망쳤어요.
하지만 그들이 그리 멀리 못 갔을 때 연못의 물이 무섭도록 광란을 일으키더니 드넓은 들판 너머로까지 세차게 뻗으며 흘러나왔어요.
도망자들이 이젠 죽었구나 생각할 때쯤, 겁에 질린 아내가 할머니보고 살려 달라 외쳤어요. 
그 즉시 그들은 변신을 해, 그녀는 두꺼비가 되고, 남편은 개구리가 되었답니다.
곧 홍수가 그들을 덮쳐버렸지만 그들을 죽일 순 없었지요, 대신 물이 그들을 뿔뿔이 떨어뜨려 멀리로 데려가 버렸답니다.
물이 사라지고 그들 둘 다 다시 마른 땅을 밟자, 다시 인간의 모습으로 돌아왔답니다.
하지만 서로 상대방이 어디로 간지는 알지 못했지요. 게다가 그들은 자신들의 고국과는 동떨어진 전혀 낯선 사람들 사이에 있었지 뭐예요.
그들 사이에는 높은 산들과 깊은 골짜기들이 가로놓여 있었기 때문이에요.
그들은 생계를 유지하기 위해 둘 다 양을 돌보는 일을 가지게 되었지요.
오랜 세월 동안 그들은 자신들의 양 떼들을 몰고 들판과 숲을 상심과 그리움에 겨워 돌아다녔답니다.
그러다 봄이 다시 찾아와 새싹이 돋아날 때쯤, 그들 둘 다 양 떼들을 데리고 출발을 하였더랬죠.
그러다 우연히도 그들이 서로 가까이에 오게 되었어요.
그들은 골짜기에서 만났는데 워낙에 시간이 지난 터라 상대방을 알아보지 못했답니다.
그럼에도 불구하고 그들의 마음이 더는 그리움에 겨워하지 않지 뭐예요.
이후 그들은 매일같이 같은 장소로 자신들의 양떼들을 몰고 나왔답니다.
그들은 말을 많이 하진 않았지만 서로가 서로에게 포근함을 느꼈답니다.
어느 날 저녁 보름달이 온 하늘을 비추는 가운데, 양들이 잠에 든 가운데, 그 양치기 남편이 호주머니에서 피리를 꺼내 슬프도록 아름다운 곡을 연주하기 시작했어요.
연주가 끝났을 때, 양치기 아내가 쓰라리도록 울고 있는 모습을 보았지요.
“왜 그리 우시는 건가요?”라며 그가 물었어요.
“아아,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “제가 그 피로 마지막 연주를 했을 때에도 이토록 밝은 보름달이 비추고 있었지요, 그 때 제 사랑하는 이의 고개가 수면 위로 올라왔답니다.”
그가 그녀를 쳐다보았어요. 그러자 그의 두 눈에서 장막이 걷히는 듯 그가 그제야 자신의 사랑스런 아내를 알아보았답니다. 
그녀 또한 그를 쳐다보았을 때, 그의 얼굴에 비췬 달빛 덕분에 남편의 얼굴을 알아볼 수 있었지요.
그들은 서로 포옹하고 키스를 하였답니다.
그들이 행복했냐고요? 두말 하면 잔소리죠.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「못 속의 물의 요정」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「못 속의 물의 요정」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter182.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



183. 난쟁이의 선물



재봉사와 ‘금세공사’(금은방주인?)가 함께 여행을 하고 있었어요.
그러던 어느 날 저녁 해가 산 너머로 졌을 때, 희미한 노랫가락이 들려오더니 점점 더 뚜렷해졌어요.
참 낯선 가락이었어요, 하지만 흥겨웠기에 그들은 여행의 피곤함도 잊고 재빨리 앞으로 나아갔죠.
그들이 도착해보니, 달이 훤히 뜬 가운데 남녀 난쟁이들이 서로 손에 손을 잡고서 기쁨과 즐거움에 취해 빙빙 원을 그리며 춤을 추고 있었어요.
그들의 노래는 참 매력적이었어요, 그게 바로 여행객들이 멀리서 들었던 노래였던 거죠.
난쟁이들 가운데엔 좀 키가 큰 할아버지 난쟁이가 앉아 계셨어요.
그는 오색찬란한 옷을 입고 있었는데, 옻칠을 한 것처럼 검은 광택이 나는 수염이 가슴까지 내려와 있었지요.
두 사람이 황홀해하며 서서 그 춤을 구경하였어요.
할아버지가 그들보고 들어오라며 손짓을 했고, 난쟁이들도 기꺼이 원을 열어주었어요.
등에 혹이 하나 있던 금세공사는 모든 곱사등이들이 그러하듯 용감했기에 원 안으로 성큼 들어갔지요. 
재봉사는 처음엔 두려워 머뭇거렸어요. 하지만 분위기가 참 좋았기에, 그도 용기를 내고 따라 들어갔지요.
곧바로 원이 다시 닫히며 난쟁이들이 폴짝폴짝 뛰며 춤추고 노래하기 시작했어요.
하지만 그때부터 할아버지가 허리춤에 매달려 있던 커다란 칼을 꺼내 갈기 시작했어요. 아주 예리해질 때까지요. 그럼 다음 그가 손님들을 돌아다봤어요.
그들은 깝짝 놀랐어요. 하지만 도망갈 틈이 없었죠. 왜냐면 그 노인이 금세공사를 잽싸게 붙잡곤 초스피드로 머리카락을 깨끗이 이발해버렸거든요. 뒤이어 똑같은 일이 재봉사에게도 일어났어요.
하지만 이발이 끝나자 무섭던 게 싹 사라졌어요. 
노인이 우정의 표시로 그들의 어깨를 토닥토닥해주었어요. 마치 모든 게 잘 처리되었다는 듯이요.
그가 손가락으로 옆에 수북이 쌓여 있던 석탄더미를 가리키며 여행객들보고 자신들의 호주머니에 가득 채우라는 시늉을 했어요.
둘 다 복종했죠, 비록 선탄이 그들에게 무슨 도움이 될지는 전혀 몰랐지만요.
그들은 다시 길을 떠나 밤을 묵을 안식처를 찾았어요.
골짜기에 들어서니 근처 수도원에 있던 시계가 밤 12시를 알리며 울렸어요.
그러자 노랫소리도 그치고 모든 게 사라지고 말았죠. 언덕엔 달빛만 남은 가운데 고독감이 자욱했죠. 
두 여행객이 여관을 찾았어요. 그들은 밀짚 침대 위에 누워 자신들의 외투로 몸을 덮었죠. 하지만 너무 피곤해서 자신들의 호주머니에서 가져온 석탄들을 꺼내는 걸 깜빡하고 말았죠.
그들이 자신들의 팔다리를 무겁게 내려누려는 무게감에 짓눌려 평소보다 일찍 깨어났어요. 호주머니에서 묵직한 게 느껴졌거든요. 그들이 석탄으로 알았던 것은 실은 순금 덩어리였어요. 두 눈으로 보고서도 믿기지가 않았죠. 너무도 행복했어요. 그리고 머리와 수염도 다시 예전처럼 수북이 자라 있었고요.
그들은 이제 큰 부자가 되었어요. 
하지만 원래 탐욕스럽던 금세공사는 자기 호주머니에 더 많은 금을 챙기지 못하고 재봉사만큼만 챙긴 게 못내 아쉬웠어요. 
자신이 가진 것에도 불구하고 더 가지고 싶어진 금세공사가 하루 더 기다렸다가 저녁에 언덕으로 나가 할아버지에게서 훨씬 더 많은 보물을 챙겨오자고 제안했어요.
재봉사는 거절하며 말했어요.
“지금도 충분한 데 왜. 난 이 돈으로 주인이 될 거야. 그리고 내 ‘짝지’(당시엔 연인을 이렇게 불렀어요. ←원문에 있는 문장임. 제가 마음대로 추가한 거 아님. ‘my dear object’라고 영역본에는 적혀 있음. 그래서 ‘짝지’라고 해석했음^^ㅋㅋ 전혀 근거 없는 해석)와도 결혼할 거고 말이야, 나는 만족한다고.”
하지만 금세공사가 거듭 부탁했기에 하루 더 머물기로 했지요.
저녁에 금세공사가 어깨에 자루 두 개를 메고 나서며 깡그리 담아올 마음으로 그 언덕으로 향했어요.
역시나 전날 밤과 같았죠.
난쟁이들이 노래를 부르며 춤을 추고 있었고, 할아버지가 그를 말끔히 이발해 주곤, 석탁을 가져가라며 손짓을 해주셨지요.
그는 자루에 담을 수 있는 최대한다로 쑤셔 넣은 후 기쁜 마음으로 돌아와, 외투로 몸을 덮고 누웠지요.
“아무리 무거워도,”라며 그가 말했어요. “이게 다 금이니까 참을 수 있어.”
결국 아침에 일어났을 때 어마어마한 부자가 되어 있을 거란 달콤한 꿈에 부풀린 채 그는 잠이 들었답니다.
눈이 떠지자마자, 그는 서둘러 자신의 호주머니부터 살폈어요. 하지만 그냥 손에 검은 석탄들만 잔득 꺼내지자 이만저만 실망한 게 아니었지요.
‘그래도 아직 전날 밤에 가져온 금이 남아 있으니까.’라며 그가 생각하고서 자리로 가 그걸 꺼내보는데, 아뿔싸 이것도 마찬가지로 원래 석탄들로 변해있지 뭐예요.
그가 새까매진 자신의 손으로 이마를 탁탁 치는데, 얼씨구 머리가 대머리인 채로 그대로인 거예요. 부드러운 대머리 말이에요. 수염 또한 똑같은 운명이었구요.
하지만 그의 불행은 이것만이 아니었어요.
그의 등에는 혹이 하나 더 붙어 있었어요. 그러니까 두 번째 혹이 첫 번째 혹 위에 큼지막하게 돋아나 있었던 거지요.
그제야 그가 이 모든 게 자신의 탐욕 때문인 걸 알고 큰 소리로 울기 시작했어요.
그 소리에 잠에서 깬 착한 재봉사가 열심히 이 불쌍한 친구를 위로하며 말했어요.
“우린 그동안 함께 여행을 해왔잖니. 그러니 내 금을 나눠 가지자구나.”
재봉사는 이 약속을 지켰답니다.
하지만 불쌍한 금세공사는 평생을 등에 혹 두 개를 달고 살아야했답니다. 게다가 대머리된 머리를 감추기 위해 모자를 항상 쓰고 다녔다네요. (ㅋㅋㅋ)
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「난쟁이의 선물」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「난쟁이의 선물」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter183.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



184. 거인과 재봉사



허풍은 엄청 심한데 하는 짓은 별 시답지 않은 어떤 재봉사가 잠시 외국으로 가 세상을 둘러보고 싶다는 생각을 하게 되었어요.
준비가 되는대로 그는 작업장을 나와 언덕을 넘고 골짜기를 지나 이따금씩은 이쪽으로 가기도 하고 또 이따금씩은 저쪽으로 가기도 하며 여하튼 계속 나아갔더랬죠.
한 번은 언덕 저 위 구름들 뒤로 탑이 하나 울창한 숲 위로 솟아나 있는 게 보이지 않겠어요.
“동에 번쩍 서에 번쩍,”라며 재봉사가 소리쳤죠. “저게 뭐지?”
호기심이 생긴 그가 대담하게 거리로 나아갔지요.
하지만 가까워짐에 따라 재봉사의 눈이 휘둥그레지고 입이 딱 벌어지지 뭐예요, 탑이 다리 두 개를 가진 걸 보는 순간, 그게 가파른 언덕을 펄쩍 뛰어넘어오더니 힘센 거인 한 명이 재봉사 앞에 서 있지 뭐예요.
“파리(날아다니는 파리. 곤충. 프랑스의 파리 아님) 다리만한 게, 뭐 하러 여기 온 거야?”라며 거인이 고함질렀어요.
소리가 어찌나 큰지 한 마디 한 마디가 다 천둥소리 같았지요. 
재봉사가 훌쩍이며 말했어요.
“그냥 이 숲에 뭐 밥벌이할 만한 게 있나 싶어 둘러보려던 거였어요.”
“그런 거라면 나를 따라와,”라며 거인이 말했어요. “내가 일자리를 줄 테니까.”
“그렇다면야 마다할 이유가 없죠? 보수(월급)는 얼마나 주실 건가요?”
“줄만큼 주지. 매년 365일, 윤년(2월 달에 ‘29일’이 있는 년도. 4년 마다 한 번씩 됨)엔 1일도 더 쳐주지. 그럼 됐냐?”
“좋아요,”라며 재봉사는 대답했지만 속으론 이렇게 생각했답니다. ‘자기 ’멍석‘(=방석) 어떻게 까느냐가 중요해. 가능한 빨리 탈출하는 게 좋겠다.’
그러고 나서 거인이 그에게 말했어요.
“어이, 땅꼬마, 가서 물 한바가지 떠와.”
“기껏 물 한바가지 가지고 되겠어요, 샘을 통째로 들고 오지?”라며 허풍쟁이가 묻더니 물주전자를 가지고 물을 뜨러갔어요.
“뭣! 샘을 통째로 들고 와.”라며 거인이 입속에서 으르렁거렸어요. 왜냐면 그는 약간 어릿광대 식으로 어리석었거든요. 그래서 덜썩 겁이 나지 뭐예요.
“이제 보니 저 땅꼬마 바보가 아니었어, 몸에 마법사가 있는 거 아냐. 조심해라, 한스 영감, 네 밑에서 ‘썩을’(봉사만 할) 놈이 아냐.”
재봉사가 물을 떠 왔을 때, 거인이 그보고 숲으로 가서 땔감을 두서너 묶음 베어오라 시켰어요.
“왜 온 숲을 다 베어오지 기껏 두서너 묶음만. 어린 나무 늙은 나무 거기 있는 나무들 다 거친 나무 보드라운 나무 할 거 없이 다 말이에요?”라며 꼬마 재봉사가 묻곤 숲으로 나무를 베러 나갔지요.
“뭣! 온 숲을 다, 어린 나무 늙은 나무 할 것 없이 거기 있는 나무들 다 거친 나무 보드라운 나무 할 거 없이. 샘을 한방에 들고 오듯.”라며 잘 속는 거인이 이번에도 입속으로 으르렁거리며 훨씬 더 겁을 먹고 말했어요. 
“역시 저 녀석은 나무딸기보다 더 한 녀석이야. 몸에 마법사가 있는 게 분명해. 조심해라, 한스 영감, 네 밑에서 ‘썩고만’(봉사만 하고) 있을 놈이 아냐!”
재봉사가 땔감을 가져오자, 거인이 저녁으로 먹게 야생 멧돼지 두세 마리를 총으로 사냥해오라 시켰어요.
“왜요, 한 방에 천 마리 다 잡아 여기로 가져오면 안 되고요?”라며 재봉사가 여봐란 듯이 또 허풍을 떨며 물었지요.
“뭐!”라며 소심한 거인이 엄청 겁을 집어먹고 큰소리로 말했어요. “오늘밤은 됐으니 그냥 자거라.”
거인은 너무 겁을 집어먹었기에 온 밤을 뜬 눈으로 지세며 어찌하면 이 저주할 만한 하인 마법사를 내쫓을 수 있을까만 생각했지요.
시간이 해결해주는 법.
다음날 아침 거인과 재봉사가 늪으로 갔을 때였어요. 그 늪은 많은 버드나무들이 빙 둘러가며 서 있었지요.
그때 거인이 말했어요.
“어이, 재봉사, 저 버드나무가지들 중 하나에 앉아봐, 가지가 아래로 휘어질 만치 네가 무거운지 봐야겠다.”
동시에 그가 가지 위에 앉아 숨을 꾹 참고 몸을 무겁게 하자 가지가 아래로 구부러졌어요.
하지만 그가 잠깐 쉬며 숨을 돌리자마자, 게다가 불행히도 주머니 속에 다리미(옷을 다리는 다리미)도 집어넣고 오지 않은 관계로, 그의 몸이 두 번 다시 보이지 않을 정도로 하늘 높이 튕겨 올랐지 뭐예요.
이에 거인이 엄청 좋아라했지요.
만약 그 재봉사 분이 두 번 다시 땅으로 떨어지지 않았다면, 당시 솟구친 속도로 봐선 지금도 하늘을 떠다니고 있을지 모른답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「거인과 재봉사」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「거인과 재봉사」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter184.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



185. 못



어느 상인이 장(시장)에서 거나하게 장사를 해, 자신의 상품을 다 팔고 돈주머니에 금화와 은화를 잔뜩 채웠답니다.
그런 다음 집에 갈 생각이었어요, 날이 떨어지기 전에 집에 도착할 작정이었거든요.
그래서 돈주머니를 말의 등에 메고 길을 떠났답니다.
낮 12시 쯤 어느 마을에 들러 잠시 쉬었지요. 
그가 다시 출발하려는데, ‘마굿간의 말을 돌보는 남자’가 상인의 말을 끌고 오더니 말했어요.
“이 놈 왼쪽 뒷발 편자(말의 신발)에서, 못이 하나 빠져 있습니다요, 나리.”
“그냥 두게나,”라며 상인이 대답했어요. “그 편자(신발)로도 10킬로미터는 더 갈 거네, 나도 어서 가야하고. 서둘러야겠군.”  
오후에, 그가 다시 한 번 더 말에서 내려 말에게 먹이를 먹이는데, 이번에도 ‘마굿간의 말을 돌보는 남자’가 방으로 찾아오더니 상인에게 말했어요.
“나리 말의 왼쪽 뒷발의 편자(신발)가 빠져 있습니다요. 대장장이를 부를깝쇼?”
“그런 대로 그냥 두게나.”라며 남자가 대답했어요. “그 상태로도 3킬로미터쯤은 거뜬히 갈 말이니. 서둘러야겠군.”
그가 다시 출발하는데, 오래지 않아 말이 절뚝거리기 시작했어요.
절뚝거리기 시작한 지 오래지 않아 말이 넘어지려고 하기 시작하더니, 넘어지려고 한지 오래지 않아 “꽈당”하고 자빠지더니 말의 다리가 부러지고 말았어요.
상인이 어쩔 수 없이 그 말을 거기다 남겨두고 가야했지요.
그는 말 등에서 돈주머니를 풀어 자기 등에 짊어지고는 뚜벅뚜벅 걸어서 집으로 갔답니다.
그리하여 그는 밤이 한참 지나서야 가까스로 집에 도착할 수 있었지요.
“그 몹쓸 못 하나 때문에,”라며 그가 혼잣말을 했어요. “재수 옴 붙었군.”
아셨죠, 급할수록 돌아가야 하는 법이예요.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「못」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「못」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter185.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



186. 무덤에 누운 불쌍한 소년



아빠 엄마가 돌아가신 가난한 목동 아이 한 명이 옛날에 있었어요.
그래서 그 아이는 행정당국에 의해 어느 부자 집에 맡겨져 먹고 자라게 되었어요.
하지만 그 부자 남자와 아내는 몹시도 마음이 나쁘고 탐욕스럽고 자신들의 재물을 애지중지하는 터라, 누구든 그들의 빵을 한 입만 먹어도 생난리를 피웠지요.
불쌍한 아이는 남자가 시키는 대로 해야 했어요, 그리고 조금만 먹고, 매는 지독히도 얻어맞으며 지냈죠.
하루는 아이가 암탉과 병아리들을 돌보고 있는데, 암탉이 휙 울타리를 뚫고 나갔다… 그만 매가 손살 같이 내려와 낚아채 가버렸어요.
소년이 소리쳤어요.
“도둑아! 도둑아! 이 악당아!”
있는 힘껏 소리쳤지요.
하지만 그게 뭔 소용이 있었겠어요?
매는 자신이 얻은 먹이를 두 번 다시 돌려주지 않았답니다.
주인이 이 소란을 듣곤 달려왔다 자신의 암탉이 사라진 것을 보곤 냅다 화를 내며 소년을 인정사정없이 두들겨 패는 바람에 소년이 이틀 동안을 꼬박 누워있어야 했답니다.
이제 소년은 암탉 없이 병아리들을 돌봐야했어요. 하지만 너무도 힘이 들었죠. 왜냐면 한 병아리가 이리로 뛰어가면 다른 병아리는 저리로 뛰어갔으니까요.
그래서 소년이 병아리들을 하나의 줄로 서로 묶어놓는 현명한 방법을 고안해냈답니다. 그럼 매가 와서 낚아채가지도 못할 거니까요.
하지만 그건 소년의 엄청난 착각이었죠.
이틀 후 지치고 배가 포픈 나머지 소년이 잠이 든 사이, 매가 또 날아와선 병아리 한 마리를 낚아챘는데 그 바람에 줄로 서로 연결되어 있던 다른 병아리들까지 한꺼번에 끌려가, 나무 위에서 모두 매에게 잡아 먹히고 말았지요.
농부가 집에 왔다 이 광경을 보곤 길길이 화를 내며 또 소년을 매몰차게 두들겨 패는 바람에 소년은 며칠을 침대에서 꼬박 누워있어야 했답니다.
소년이 다시 두 다리로 걸을 수 있게 되었을 때, 농부가 말했어요.
“넌 내가 일을 시키기엔 너무 무식하다. 사고 덩어리야. 그러니 잔심부름이나 해라.”
그러면서 그는 소년에게 포도 한 바구니와 편지 한 통을 주며 재판관 집으로 심부름을 보냈어요.
가는 도중 배가 고프고 목도 마라 고통스럽자 이 불운한 소년이 포도 두 송이를 먹고 말았어요.
그가 바구니를 재판관에게 내밀자, 재판관은 편지를 읽더니 바구니 속 포도들을 세더니 말했어요.
“두 송이가 모자라다.”
소년이 정직하게 고백을 했어요. 배고프고 목이 말라 어쩔 수 없이 두 송이를 먹어치우게 되었다고요.
재판관이 농부에게 다시 편지를 적어 보내며 같은 개수의 포도를 다시 보내달라 말했어요.
이번에도 소년이 바구니와 편지를 가져다주게 되었어요.
가는 도중 너무도 배가 고프고 목이 말라 어쩔 수 없이 소년이 다시 두 송이를 먹었어요.
하지만 그러기 전 소년은 얼른 바구니 속에서 편지를 꺼내 돌멩이 아래에 감추곤 그 위에 엉덩이를 대고 앉아 편지가 자신을 볼 수 없게 해두었지요.
하지만 재판관이 포도송이가 부족하단 소리를 다시 했어요.
“아아,”라며 소년이 말했어요. “어찌 그걸 아셨답니까? 편지가 말해줄 리는 없는데. 왜냐면 제가 돌멩이 아래에 편지를 감추고 먹었거든요.”
재판관은 이 소년의 순박함에 웃지 않을 수가 없어, 불쌍한 소년을 더 잘 돌보고 고기며 음료수도 부족함이 없게 해주고 잘못되지 않고 바른 사람이 될 수 있도록 가르쳐주란 편지를 주인에게 적어 보냈답니다.
“놀고자빠져 있네.”라며 무정한 남자가 말했어요. “많이 쳐 먹으면 일은 언제 해. 잘못일랑 그때그때 두들겨 패면 돼지. 몽둥이찜질로도 교육은 충분하다고.”
다음날 주인은 소년에게 힘든 임무를 부여했어요. 말에게 먹일 밀짚 두 묶음을 자르란 거였지요. 그러면서 주인은 잊지 않았어요.
“다섯 시간 후에,”라며 그가 말했죠. “내가 돌아와 볼 테야, 그때까지 다 안 되어 있음, 다리몽둥이가 분질러질 때까지 얻어맞을 줄 알아.”
농부는 자기 아내와 하인과 하녀를 데리고 1년 마다 열리는 박람회에 놀려가 버렸어요. 그러면서도 소년에겐 빵 쪼가리 하나만 딸랑 남겨주었죠.
소년이 긴 의자에 앉아 온힘을 다해 일을 시작했어요.
그래도 날이 더운지라 몸을 식히려고 옷을 밀짚 위에 벗어났죠.
일이 많아 계속 자르고만 있는데 서둘다 보니 부주의하게도 자신의 옷까지 밀짚과 함께 자르고 말았지 뭐예요.
이 불행을 너무도 늦게 알게 된 소년은 어쩔 줄을 몰라 했어요.
“아아,”라며 소년이 말했어요. “난 이제 끝장이야! 성질 나쁜 주인님이 나를 가만두지 않을 텐데. 집에 돌아와 내가 해놓은 짓을 보면 날 죽일 거야. 그럴 바에야 차라리 내 스스로 목숨을 끊는 게 나아.”
소년은 예전에 얼핏 주인아주머니가 “내 침대 밑에 독약을 숨겨놓았지.”라고 말하는 걸 들은 적이 있어요.
하지만 그건 꿀이었고, 아무도 못 먹게 하려고 그녀가 지어낸 말이었지요.
소년은 침대 밑으로 기어들어가 꿀단지를 꺼낸 다음 모두 먹어치워버렸어요.
“원 세상에,”라며 소년이 말했어요. “사람들이 죽음은 쓰다 그러더니, 이제 보니 죽음이 내게 이리도 달콤할 수가 없어. 주인아주머니가 왜 그토록 종종 죽기를 갈망한 건지 알겠네.”
그는 자신의 작은 의자에 앉아 죽음이 오길 기다렸어요.
하지만 몸이 약해지기는커녕, 영양가가 듬뿍한 음식을 먹은 터라 몸에 기운이 샘솟는 게 느껴지지 뭐예요.
“독이 아니었던 가바.”라며 소년이 생각했어요. “하지만 주인아저씨가 예전에 옷장 속에 파리 잡으려고 작은 독 병을 넣어두었다 말한 적이 있었지. 분명 그건 죽을 수 있는 진짜 독약일거야.”
하지만 그건 파리약이 전혀 아니라 헝가리산 포도주였답니다.
어찌되었던 소년이 그 술병을 다 비웠어요.
“이번 죽음도 맛이 참 달구나.”라며 소년이 말했어요. 
하지만 포도주 기운이 소년의 머리로까지 올라오지 이번엔 정말 정신이 몽롱해지기 시작했어요.
“이제야 정말로 죽나보네.”라며 소년이 말했어요. “그렇담 교회 공동묘지로 가 누울 만한 무덤을 찾아봐야지.”
그가 비틀 비틀거리며 교회 공동묘지에 도착해 사람들이 새로 파 놓은 무덤 속에 드러누웠어요. 점점 정신과 감각이 무뎌지는 게 느껴졌어요.
근처에 여관이 하나 있었는데, 그곳에서 결혼식이 한창 진행중이었어요. 그 음악소리가 들리자, 소년은 자신이 벌써 천국에 와 있다 상상했지요. 하지만 소년은 결국 의식을 잃고 말았답니다. 두 번 다시 깨어나지 못했죠. 강한 포도주의 술기운 탓에 생긴 몸의 열기와 밤에 내린 차가운 이슬 탓에 목숨을 잃고 만 거예요. 소년은 그렇게 무덤에 들어가 누운 채 움직이지 못했죠.
한편 소년이 죽었다는 소식을 들은 농부는 겁에 질려 재판소에 끌려가게 될까봐 두려워 엄청 스트레스를 받은 나머지 의식을 잃고 바닥에 쓰려지고 말았어요.
때마침 부엌에서 뜨거운 기름이 가득 든 냄비를 데우며 서 있던 아내가 다급하게 달려와 남편을 부축했지요.
하지만 냄비에서 발생한 화염 때문에 온 집이 불길에 휩싸여 몇 시간 만에 모든 게 잿더미가 되는 바람에, 그들 부부는 남은 생을 가난과 비참함 속에서 설상가상 양심의 고통까지 받아가며 살아야했답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「무덤에 누운 불쌍한 소년」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「무덤에 누운 불쌍한 소년」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter186.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



187. 진짜 신부



젊고 아리따운 아가씨가 옛날에 한 명 있었습니다.
하지만 그녀는 어릴 적 친엄마를 잃고 말았죠. 그래서 새엄마가 왔는데, 새엄마는 그녀를 목잡아먹어서(못 괴롭혀서) 안달이었어요.
새엄마가 시키는 일마다 아가씨는 참 부지런히도 했지만 새엄마는 늘 못마땅해 했지요.
워낙 사악한 여자라 감동을 줄 수 없었던 거지요. 그리고 항상 만족하지 않했지요.
아가씨가 더 힘든 일을 하면 할수록, 새엄마는 더 힘든 일을 내주었어요. 새엄마 머릿속은 온통 어떻게 하면 더 부담되는 일을 시켜서 아가씨의 삶을 더 불행하게 할 수 있을까로 꽉 차 있었거든요.
어느 날 새엄마가 그녀에게 말했어요.
“여기 깃털 5킬로그램이 있다, 이걸 다 뽑아 놓거라. 만에 하나 오늘 저녁때까지 해놓지 못하면 흠뻑 맞을 줄 알거라. 하루 종일 빈둥거리며 놀 생각만 하니?”
불쌍한 아가씨는 시작하기 위해 자리에 앉았지만, 두 뺨 위로 눈물이 또르르 흘러내리는 것은 어쩔 수 없었어요. 왜냐면 아무리 봐도 작업량이 하루 만에 다 할 수준이 아니었거든요.
깃털들을 한 움큼 앞에다 놓고 자신도 모르게 괴로워 손을 깍지 끼고서 한숨을 내쉴 때면, 깃털들이 사방으로 날아가 버리는 바람에 그녀가 다시 주워 담고 작업을 새로 시작해야했지요.
결국 그녀가 책상에 팔꿈치를 대고 두 손으로 얼굴을 감싸며 울었어요.
“대체 나를 동정하는 사람이 있기나 한 걸까?”
그때 소곤거리는 목소리가 들려왔어요.
“편히 생각하렴, 얘야, 내가 널 도와줄게.”
처녀가 올려다보니 웬 할머니 한 분이 곁에 서 계시지 않겠어요.
그녀가 소녀의 손을 다정히 잡으며 말했어요.
“널 괴롭히는 게 뭐니, 말해보렴.”
그래서 아가씨가 소상히 말씀드렸지요. 자신의 불행한 삶이며, 매일같이 부담 지워지는 또 다른 일거리들이 있는데 도저히 끝을 맺을 수 없다는 얘기들이요.
“만일 제가 오늘 저녁까지 이 깃털들을 다 뽑아놓지 못하면, 제 새…엄마가 때린다고 했어요. 정말 절 때리실 거예요, 그분이 그럴 거란 걸 전 잘아요.”
그녀의 눈물이 다시 흘러내리기 시작했지요.
하지만 상냥한 할머님은 말했어요.
“걱정 말거라, 얘야. 좀 쉬고 있으렴, 그럼 내가 네 일을 대신해놓으마.”
아가씨는 자신의 침대에 누웠다 곧 잠이 들고 말았지요.
할머니는 깃털이 가득 담긴 그 책상에 앉았어요. 깃촉(깃대 아랫부분)을 어떻게 떼어냈냐고요?, 그녀의 메마른 두 손이 닿자마자 깃촉들이 다 날아가 버린 걸요.
5킬로그램짜리 작업이 금방 끝맺어졌지요.
소녀가 일어났을 때, 눈송이처럼 새하얀 깃털 더미들이 수북이 쌓여있었답니다. 그리고 방도 깔끔히 정리정돈 되어 있었지요. 하지만 할머님은 온데간데없이 사라지고 말았지요.
아가씨는 하느님께 감사기도를 드리고 저녁때까지 얌전히 앉아 있었어요.
새…엄마가 들어왔다가 일이 끝나 있는 것을 보고 깜짝 놀랐지요.
“봐라, 요 고얀 것,”라며 새엄마가 말했어요. “부지런히 하면 되잖니. 못한다고 할 땐 언제고? 손이나 깍지 끼고 앉아 있으려고나 하고 말이야.”
방을 나서며 새엄마는 말했어요.
“그 참 신통하네, 아무래도 다음엔 훨씬 더 힘든 일을 좀 시켜봐야 되겠어.”
다음날 아침에 새엄마가 아가씨를 다시 불러 말했어요.
“자 스푼(숟가락)이다. 이걸로 정원 옆에 있는 큰 연못의 물을 다 퍼거라, 밤까지 다 못해놓으면 어떻게 될지 잘 알지.”
아가씨가 그 스푼을 받아보니 구멍이 숭숭 뚫린 그저 그런 그냥 스푼이었어요. 심지어 멀쩡한 스푼으로도 연못의 물을 다 못 펄 건데 말이죠.
그녀가 즉시 일을 시작했어요, 연못가에 무릎을 꿇고 앉았지요. 하지만 쭈르르 흘러내리는 건 눈물이겠죠. 어걸 언제 다 비울까요.
하지만 착한 할머님께서 다시 나타났어요. 소녀의 슬픔을 전해들은 할머니가 말했어요.
“기운을 내려무나, 얘야. 수풀로 가서 좀 누워 자고 있음, 내가 그동안 네 일을 다해놓으마.”
할머니가 홀로 남자마자 연못을 톡 하고 건드렸더니, 어머 세상에 물기둥이 하늘 높이 솟아오르며 구름들과 합쳐지는 게 아니겠어요.
그렇게 차츰 차츰 연못이 비워지기 시작해, 해가 지고 아가씨가 잠에서 깨었을 땐 진흙에서 파닥이고 있는 물고기들밖에 보이지 않았죠.
아가씨는 새엄마에게 갔어요. 일이 다 끝난 걸 보여주었죠.
“어걸 어떻게 다한 거지.”라며 그녀의 얼굴이 분노로 점점 새하얘졌지요. 하지만 그 와중에도 새엄마는 새로운 걸 생각해냈죠.
셋째 날 아침이 되자 새엄마가 아가씨에게 말했어요.
“저기 있는 평지에 성을 짓거라, 저녁까지 모두 끝내야한다.”
아가씨가 이번만은 자포자기해 말했어요.
“어떻게 그 큰일을 제가 다해요?”
“하라면 해, 토 달지 말고.”라며 새엄마가 발악을 하셨어요. “구멍 숭숭 뚫린 스푼으로 연못을 다 비웠을 정도면 성하나 만드는 건 일도 아니잖겠니. 누가 뭐래도 난 오늘 성을 가져야겠다. 하나라도 부족했다간 봐, 부엌이며 지하실에 있는 가장 사소한 거 하나까지도 있어야 할 건 다 있어야 돼!”
새엄마는 아가씨를 끌고 골짜기로 가 바위들이 수북이 쌓여있는 곳에 떠밀었어요.
그 바위들 중 가장 작은 거 하나를, 아가씨가 온힘을 다해 움직여 보려했지만 정말이지 끄떡도 하지 않았어요.
그녀가 주저앉아 울기 시작했어요. 이 외진 곳에 할머니가 자신을 도와주러 오실 일도 없었으니까요.
하지만 할머니는 머지않아 모습을 드러내셨답니다.
“편안히 있으렴,”라고 할머니가 말했어요. “그들에 누워 잠이라도 자 두려무나, 내가 너를 위해 성을 금방 지어다주마. 마음에 들면, 네가 들어가 살아도 된단다.”
아가씨가 가자, 할머니가 그 회색 바위들을 톡톡 두드리셨어요.
바위들이 일어나기 시작하더니 마치 거인들이 벽들을 쌓듯 같이 둥실둥실 움직이기 시작하는 게 아니겠어요.
이리하여 건물이 하나 세워졌지요, 정말이지 무수한 작업자의 손길이 가해진 성 같았어요. 돌로 차곡차곡 쌓아 올린 성 말이에요.
곧 땅속에서 둔탁하고 묵직한 소리가 들리더니 기둥들이 저절로 높다랗게 솟아오르며 자기들끼리 간격에 맞춰 배열되었지요.
지붕위에선 기와들이 저절로 놓이고 있었지요.
그렇게 낮12시 쯤 되자, 지붕 위에 설치해놓은 풍향계(바람개비)가 지붕 꼭대기에서 저절로 돌기 시작하고 있었답니다. 그 풍향계는 펄럭이는 의상을 입은 황금머릿결을 한 처녀의 모습을 하고 있었지요.
저녁노을이 드리워지는 동안 성안 공사도 마무리 단계에 접어 들어가고 있었어요.
할머님이 어떻게 그 일을 다 하셨는지 저는 모르지만, 방의 벽들마다 의자그림을 수놓은 비단과 벨벳(융털)이 내걸렸고요. 그리고 대리석 책상들 옆엔 호화롭게 꾸민 안락의자들이 자리했고요, 천정들엔 수정 샹들리에(촛불들)가 매달렸지요. 그걸 또 바닥 위 보드라운 마감재들이 반사해주는 화려함이란. 금박을 입힌 새장들엔 초록 앵무새들이 있었고요, 그 외에도 낯선 새들이 저마다 가장 아름다운 노래를 부르고 있었죠. 온 사방이 어찌나 장엄하고 화려한지 왕이 여기 들어와 살아도 손색없겠지 뭐예요.
해가 막 지고 아가씨가 깨어났을 때를 맞춰, 수천 개의 초들이 불을 밟히며 그녀의 얼굴을 비추었어요.
그녀가 허겁지겁 그 성으로 가 열린 문을 통해 들어가보았어요.
계단들 위엔 붉은 천이 깔려 있었고, 황금 난간들이 활짝 핀 나무들에 둘러싸여 있었죠.
화려한 방을 보았을 때, 그녀는 돌처럼 굳어버리고 말았답니다.
새엄마가 떠오르지 않았다면 그녀는 아마도 한참을 그렇게 멍하니 서 있었을지 누가 알겠어요?
“아아!”라며 그녀가 혼자 말했어요. “이제 이 정도면, 새엄마도 나를 괴롭히는 걸 관두시겠지.”
아가씨가 새엄마에게 가 성이 완성되었다 말씀드렸어요.
“내가 직접 가봐야겠다.”라며 새엄마가 자리에서 일어나며 말했어요.
그들이 성에 들어섰을 때, 모든 게 너무도 영롱해 새엄마도 손으로 눈을 가렸을 정도였답니다.
“봤니,”라며 새엄마가 아가씨에게 말했어요. “쉽게 하잖니. 이럴 줄 알았음 더 힘든 걸 네게 맡기는 건데.”
새엄마는 모든 방들을 둘러보고 구석구석까지 뭔가 꼬투리 잡을 게 있는지 살폈어요. 하지만 그럴 게 있을 턱이 없었죠.
“그럼 이제 지하로 가보자.”라며 새엄마가 악의적인 눈빛으로 아가씨를 쳐다보며 말했어요. “부엌이며 지하실들을 점검해봐야겠어, 혹시 하나라도 빠진 게 있음 혼날 줄 알아.”
하지만 난로에는 불이 타오르고 있었고, 납작한 냄비들에선 고기가 구워지고 있었죠, ‘부젓가락’(화로에 꽂아두고 사용하는 쇠 젓가락)과 삽들이 벽에 기대어 있었죠. 번쩍이는 놋쇠 부엌세간(그릇)들이 보기 좋게 배열되어 있었죠.
정말 나무랄 데가 하나도 없었어요. 심지어 석탄통과 물통까지 하나씩 구비되어 있었을 정도였으니까요.
“지하실이 어느 쪽이지?”라며 새엄마가 소리쳤어요. “뭐라도 없어봐, 내가 아주 그냥 아작을 내줄 테니까.”
새엄마는 직접 뚜껑문을 들어 올리더니 아래로 내려갔어요. 하지만 그녀가 채 두 계단도 내려가지 않았을 때 묵직한 뚜껑문이 도로 닫히면서 그녀의 등을 밀쳐버리는 바람에 그녀가 아래로 굴러 떨어지고 말았어요.
비명소리를 듣고서 아가씨가 뚜껑문을 도로 열고 새엄마를 도우러 내려 가보니, 새엄마는 벌써 거꾸러져있었어요. 아가씨가 바닥에 내려가 살펴보니 새엄마는 이미 숨을 거둔 이후였어요.
이제 이 웅장한 성은 아가씨 단독 소유가 되었어요.
그녀도 처음엔 이 큰 행운(웅장한 성)에 어찌할 바를 모를 정도였죠.
아름다운 드레스들이 옷장마다 걸려 있었고, 대형상자마다 금과 은 그리고 보석과 진주들이 가득 차 있었어요. 이러니 그녀로서도 만족하는 것 외엔 그 바랄 것이 없다 여길 정도였지요.
곧 미모의 아가씨가 부자가 되었단 소문이 온 사방으로 퍼져나갔어요.
매일같이 구혼자들이 왔지만, 누구도 그녀의 마음에 들진 않았어요.
결국 왕자님이 오시자 그녀도 심쿵해 서로 약혼을 하기에 이르렀지요. 
성의 정원엔 라임나무가 한 그루 있었답니다. 공주와 왕자님이 그 아래에 함께 앉았을 때, 왕자님이 그녀에게 말했어요.
”집에 가서 우리 결혼에 대한 아빠의 동의를 받아오겠소. 부디 내가 올 동안 이 라임나무 아래서 기다려주시구려. 내 몇 시간 안에 돌아오리다.“
아가씨가 사랑의 증표로 왕자님의 왼쪽 뺨에 키스를 해주며 말했어요.
”당신을 믿어요, 누구도 이 왼쪽 뺨에 키스하지 못하게 하셔야해요. 당신이 돌아오실 때까지 여기 이 라임나무 아래서 기다리고 있을 게요.“
아가씨는 해질녘 때까지 그 라임나무 아래서 머물렀어요. 하지만 왕자님은 돌아오시지 않았지요.
그녀는 3일을 아침부터 밤까지 거기 앉아 왕자님을 기다려보았지만 모두 허사(헛수고)였어요.
4일째까지 기다릴 수 없었던 그녀가 말했어요.
“뭔 사고가 나신 게야. 내가 찾아나서 봐야겠다. 왕자님을 찾을 때까진 돌아오지 않을 테야.”
그녀는 가장 아름다운 드레스 세 벌을 챙겼어요. 빛나는 별들을 수놓은 드레스와, 은빛 달들을 수놓은 드레스, 그리고 금빛 태양들을 수놓은 드레스가 그것이었죠. 그녀는 또한 손수건에 보석도 한 움큼 챙겨 담아 여행을 떠났답니다.
그녀는 가는 곳마다 자신의 연인을 수소문했어요. 하지만 아무도 그를 못보았다네요. 그리고 아무도 왕자님에 대해 아는 바가 없었어요.
더 멀리 더 넓은 곳까지 그녀는 세상을 헤매고 다녔지만, 끝내 왕자님을 찾진 못했어요.
마침내 그녀는 어느 농장주의 ‘소를 돌보는 사람’ 일자리를 구했어요. 그리고 자신의 드레스들과 보석들은 어느 돌 아래에 묻어두었죠.
이제 그녀는 ‘소를 돌보는 여인’으로 살게 되었답니다. 소 떼가 흩어지지 않게 망을 보는 일이었지요. 그래도 연인에 대한 그리움으로 참 슬펐답니다. 그녀는 또한 어린 송아지 한 마리를 따로 기르게 되었어요. 자신의 손으로 송아지에게 먹이를 먹이며 그녀가 말했지요.
“아기 송아지야, 어린 송아지야, 내 곁에 앉으렴, 라임나무 그늘 아래서 기다리던 약혼녀 신부를 왕자님이 잊었듯, 너까지 양치기 소녀를 잊으면 안 돼.”
그럼 어린 송아지는 무릎을 굻고 앉아고, 그녀는 송아지를 토닥토닥해주었답니다.
그녀가 그렇게 홀로 2~3년을 슬픔이 가득한 채 살아가던 어느 날, 공주님이 결혼식을 올리실 거란 소문이 온 왕국에 쫘 퍼졌답니다.
그런데 수도(서울)로 가려면 아가씨가 사는 그 마을을 거쳐 가야 했지요.
한번은 아가씨가 소떼를 몰고 가고 있는데 그녀의 신랑이 지나가는 게 아니겠어요.
그이는 위풍당당하게 말에 앉아 있었죠. 결코 주위를 둘러보는 일이 없었어요. 하지만 아가씨는 단번에 그이가 자신의 연인인 걸 알아보았지요. 그러자 예리한 칼이 그녀의 심장을 관통하는 듯했어요.
“아아!”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “내가 그렇게 그이를 믿었건만, 그이는 나를 잊으셨구나.”
다음날 그이가 다시 길을 따라 가고 있었어요.
그이는 그녀 가까이 지나갈 때, 그녀가 아기 송아지에게 말했지요.
“아기 송아지야, 어린 송아지야, 내 곁에 앉으렴, 라임나무 그늘 아래서 기다리던 약혼녀 신부를 왕자님이 잊었듯, 너까지 양치기 소녀를 잊으면 안 돼.”
그녀의 목소리를 알아들은 그가 고삐를 당겨 말을 세우곤 소를 돌보는 여인의 얼굴을 들여다보았지요. 마치 뭔가를 기억해내려는 듯 그가 두 손을 눈에 대었지만 그는 곧 가던 길을 가버리고 말았어요. 그리곤 시야에서 사라져버렸죠.
“아아!”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “그이는 더는 날 몰라봐.” 
그래서 그녀의 상심은 이루 다 말로 표현할 수조차 없을 지경이었어요.
곧 큰 만찬이 궁전에서 3일 동안 진행될 예정이라, 온 나라에서 초대를 받고 왔지요.
‘이게 내 마지막 기회야.’라고 아가씨는 생각하고서 저녁에 자신의 보물들을 숨겨놓은 돌로 가, 금빛 태양들을 수놓은 드레스를 꺼내 입고 보석들로 자신을 꾸민 다음, 그동안 손수건 속에 감추어두었던 머리카락들을 아래로 늘어뜨렸지요. 긴 곱슬머리를 주렁주렁 늘어뜨린 그녀가 수도(도시)에 가니 어둠속에선 아무도 그녀를 주목하지 못했지요. 
그녀가 환히 불을 밝힌 홀(큰 공간)로 들어서니 모두들 놀라워하며 뒤로 물러나주었어요. 하지만 역시나 아무도 그녀를 알아보지 못했죠.
왕자님이 그녀를 맞이했지만, 그도 그녀를 알아보지 못한 건 마찬가지였어요.
왕자님이 그녀에게 손을 내밀며 춤을 신청했어요. 그녀가 너무도 매혹적이게 아름다웠기에, 왕자님도 다른 신부를 더는 생각하지 않았어요.
만찬이 끝나자, 그녀는 군중(사람들) 속으로 사라져 날이 밝기 전까지 서둘러 마을로 돌아와 자신의 소를 돌보는 작업복을 한 번 더 입었어요.
다음날 아침 그녀는 은빛 달들을 수놓은 드레스를 꺼내 입고, 보석으로 만든 반달 모양 머리핀을 했지요.
그녀가 잔치에 나타나니, 모든 눈들이 그녀에게로만 향했고, 왕자님조차도 그녀를 사랑한 나머지 서둘러 마중 나왔을 정도였어요. 왕자님은 그녀와만 춤을 추러하셨고, 어떤 다른 여인에게도 눈길 한 번 주지 않았죠.
그녀가 떠나기 전, 왕자님은 그녀에게서 내일 저녁에 있을 마지막 잔치 때 다시 오겠단 약속을 받아내기에 이르렀지요.
그녀가 셋째 날 모습을 드러냈을 때, 그녀는 걸음걸이 한 걸음마다 빛나는 별들을 수놓은 드레스를 입고, 보석들이 점점이 박힌 ‘헤어 리본’(머리카락 예쁘게 묶는 거)과 허리띠를 하고 왔지요.
왕자님은 이미 한참을 기다리고 있었던 차라 황급히 그녀 쪽으로 다가섰지요.
“이제 당신이 누구신지 말씀해주시지요,”라며 그가 말했어요. “아무래도 당신은 오래전부터 알고 있었다는 느낌이 막 들었거든요.”
“당신이 저를 떠나가실 때 제가 징표를 남겨드린 걸 잊으셨나요?”
그때 그녀가 그쪽으로 한발 다가서며 왼쪽 뺨에 키스를 했어요.
그 순간 마치 왕자님의 두 눈에서 흐림이 걷히듯 그가 진짜 신부를 알아보았답니다.
“오시오,”라며 왕자님이 그녀에게 말했어요. “여기 더 있을 게 아니오.”
그는 그녀의 손을 잡고 계단 아래로 가 마차에 태웠어요.
말들은 서둘러 나가더니 그 마법의 성으로 향했어요. 마치 바람이 마차를 몰듯 말이죠.
저 멀리에서부터 창문들엔 불이 환히 밝혀 있었고요.
그들이 그 라임나무를 지날 땐 무수히 많은 반딧불이들이 떼 지어 몰려와주었고요.
라임나무는 나뭇가지들을 흔들며 향기로움을 내뿜어주었지요.
계단마다 꽃들이 활짝 피워있었고요, 기묘한 새들의 노랫소리들이 방마다 울리고 있었어요, 그리고 홀(큰 공간)에는 사람들이 가득 모여 있었답니다. 
특히 목사님까지도, 신랑이 진짜 신부와 결혼식을 올리는 걸 주재해주기 위해 기다리고 있었다네요~♥.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「진짜 신부」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「진짜 신부」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter187.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



188. 토끼와 고슴도치



우리 사랑하는 어린 친구들 안뇽~♥, 이 이야기는 가짜인 거 같지만 사실 진짜랍니다. 왜냐면 제 할아버지로부터 제가 직접 전해들은 얘기거든요.
할아버지는 이 얘기를 들려주시며 만족스럽다는 듯 말씀하셨죠.
“얘야, 이 얘긴 진짜란다, 그렇지 않음 누가 말하겠니.”
그 이야기는 다음과 같답니다.
대략 농작물을 거두는 시기인, 어느 날 일요일 아침, 그러니까 메밀꽃이 필 무렵, 하늘에선 햇살이 따사롭게 비추고, 동풍(동쪽에서 불어오는 바람)이 그루터기(곡식을 베어내고 남은 밑동) 밭 위로 따뜻한 훈풍을 불어넣어줄 때, 종달새가 허공에서 노래를 부르고, 벌꿀들이 메밀꽃 사이를 윙윙 돌아다니고, 사람들이 정장을 빼 입고 저마다 교회에 가려고 할 때, 그러니까 모든 사람과 동물들이 한없이 행복해할 때, 우리의 고슴도치 또한 마냥 행복했답니다.
손을 허리에 대고 팔꿈치는 옆으로 벌리고서 문에 서 있는 고슴도치는 지금 아침 산들바람을 즐기며 혼자서 중얼중얼 콧노래를 부르고 있었죠.
행복한 일요일 아침에 노래를 부르는 버릇이야 말로 고슴도치들이 받은 더도 덜도 없는 축복이지요.
그가 그러고 혼자 좀 크게 노래를 읊조리고 있을 때, 그러니까 그의 아내가 아이들을 씻기고 말려주고 있을 때, 별안간 밭에까지 산책을 나가보고 싶다는 열망이 생기지 뭐예요, 순무(먹는 무의 일종. 사진링크▶ https://goo.gl/VPOB5B )가 밭에서 잘 자라고 있는지 보고 오게 말이죠.
사실 뭐, 순무 밭이라 해 봐야 바로 그의 집 옆에 딱 붙어 있었지만요. 그 밭에서 나는 순무를 그와 가족들이 즐겨 먹었더랬죠. 그래서 고슴도치는 그 밭을 자기 소유로 인식하고 있었답니다.
말 떨어지기 무섭게, 고슴도치가 현관문을 닫고서 밭으로 가는 길에 올랐어요.
멀리 갈 필요는 없었죠. 자두나무만 돌면 순무가 자라고 있는 밭이 바로 나오니까요.
그래서 막 모퉁이를 돌려는데 그만 고슴도치 자신과 똑같은 용무로 양배추 밭을 방문하려던 산토끼와 마주쳤지 뭐예요.
토끼를 본 고슴도치는 “안녕하세요.”라고 상냥한 아침인사를 건넸어요.
하지만 토끼로 말할 거 같으면 자칭 신사인 척 하는 아주 거만한 자라 고슴도치의 인사에 답인사를 할 턱이 없었죠.
그래도 토끼가 이번엔 말을 건네긴 했는데요, 그것도 아주 경멸적인 말투로 이렇게 말했죠.
“그래, 그 꼴을 하고 아침나절부터 밭엘 나와 봤는가?”
“산책 나왔어요.”라며 고슴도치가 말했죠.
“산책!”라며 토끼가 방긋 웃으며 말했어요. “그 다리가 그 용도로도 사용될 수 있다는 건 오늘 또 처음 알았구먼.”
이 싸가지 없는 말에 고슴도치도 발끈했답니다. 왜냐면 다른 공격은 다 참아도 정말이지 짧은 다리를 흉보는 말만은 고슴도치로선 참을 수가 없었거든요. 고슴도치의 본성이 그런 걸요.
그래서 고슴도치도 토끼에게 이렇게 말했죠.
“당신 다리가 내 거보다 훨 낫다 생각하시는 모양이군요.”
“그럼 그걸 지금 말이라고 하는감.”라며 토끼가 말했어요. 
“그럼 한 번 시합해보실래요,”라며 고슴도치가 말했어요. “내기 걸고 달려요 우리, 내가 반드시 이길 테니까요.”
“아주 그냥 꼴값을 하는구먼! 그 짧은 다리로 나보다 잘도 달리겠다!”라며 토끼가 말했어요. “하지만 내 기꺼이 그 시합에 응해주지. 당시 그딴 생각을 못하게 말이야. 그래 무얼 걸까?”
“프랑스 금화 1개랑 브랜디(과실주를 증류해서 만든 술) 한 병요.”라며 고슴도치가 말했어요.
“콜(좋아),”라며 토끼가 말했어요. “자 그럼 악수하고, 한 번 기똥차게 달려볼까.”
“아뇨,”라며 고슴도치가 말했어요. “그렇게 급하게 서두르실 건 없어요! 제가 지금 배가 고파 일단 집에 가서 뭐라도 먹고 와서 달리시죠. 30분 후에 이 장소로 다시 만나요 우리.”
이 결과로써 고슴도치는 즉시 집으로 출발했고, 그 꼴이 토끼는 가소롭기만 해 만족스러웠지요.
집에 오는 도중 고슴도치는 속으로 생각했어요.
‘저 녀석이 자기 긴 다리만 믿네, 하지만 난 너 보다 더한 꾀가 있다고. 지가 신사일지 몰라도 어리석기 그지없는 녀석이야 이번에 똑똑히 자기 말에 대한 대가를 지불하게 될 거야.’
그리하여 집에 도착한 고슴도치가 자신의 아내에게 가 말했어요.
“여보, 얼른 옷 걸치고 나랑 밭에 가자.”
“아니 또 왜요?”라며 아내가 말했어요. 
“내가 산토끼와 달리기 시합 내기를 걸었는데, 상금이 자그마치 프랑스 금화 1개와 브랜디 한 병이야. 시합은 내가 할 테니, 당신은 상금이나 챙기면 돼.”
“아이고 여보 이게 무슨 꼴이래,”라며 아내가 소리쳤어요. “당신 제 정신이에요, 아님 더위에 헤까닥(정심이 잠시 나감)하신 거예요? 도대체 어떻게 토끼와 달리기 시합에서 이길 생각을 하실 수 있단 말이에요?”
“그 놈의 주동이 좀 다물어, 이 여편네야,”라며 고슴도치가 말했어요. “이건 내 용무라고. 남자의 자존심을 건 일에 이것저것 따지고 들지 좀 마. 어서 옷이나 입고 따라와, 얼른.”
남편이 이렇게 나오는데 고슴도치 아내로서 뭘 더 할 수 있었겠어요. 그녀는 남편의 말에 복종하고 좋든 싫든 따라나설 수밖에 없었답니다.
그렇게 그들이 함께 길을 가는 동안, 고슴도치가 자신의 아내에게 말했어요.
“지금부터 내가 하는 말 정신 똑바로 차리고 들어. 봐봐, 저 긴 밭에서 시합을 하자고 내가 그럴 거야. 토끼가 한쪽 밭고랑(흙이 두둑이 쌓인 부분)에서 갈릴 거고, 내가 다른 밭고랑에서 달릴 거야. 시작점은 이쪽 끝이고. 그러니 당신은 밭고랑 저쪽 끝에 숨어 있으라고, 그러다 토끼가 당신이 숨어 있는 밭고랑 끝에 도착하면 당신이 ‘난 벌써 왔지롱!’라며 외치라고!”
밭에 도착하자 아내가 숨을 장소를 고슴도치가 지정해주었어요. 
그런 다음 고슴도치는 그 밭고랑의 반대쪽 끝으로 갔지요.
그가 가보니 토끼는 벌써 거기 와 있었어요.
“그럼 출발할까?”라며 토끼가 말했어요.
“당연하지,”라며 고슴도치도 말했어요. 
“그럼 둘이 동시에 가는 거다.”
그렇게 말하며 둘은 각자 자신이 뛸 밭고랑에 가 자리를 잡았어요.
토끼가 숫자를 헤아렸어요.
“하나, 둘, 셋, 그럼 탕!”
그 즉시 토끼가 마치 회오리바람 마냥 밭고랑 아래쪽으로 향해 돌진했어요.
하지만 고슴도치는 세 발작만 뛰어가다 밭고랑 아래로 몸을 쏙 숨기곤 가만히 앉아 있었죠.
그리하여 토끼가 의기양양하게 들판 저 아래쪽까지 전속력으로 달려가보니, 고슴도치의 아내가 ‘난 벌써 왔지롱!’라고 소리치며 토끼를 맞이하는 게 아니겠어요.
토끼가 놀라 잠시 어안이 벙벙해져 자기에게 소리치는 게 정말 고슴도치 본인이라 여기고 말았죠. 사실 고슴도치의 아내가 남편을 닮지 누굴 닮았겠어요.
하지만 토끼는 속으로 생각했지요.
‘이건 공정하지 않아,’
그러면서 토끼가 소리쳤어요. 
“한 판 더 해, 한 번 더 달려보자고.”
그리하여 이번엔 토끼가 마치 폭풍우에 이는 강풍처럼 출발했지요, 그건 정말이지 새처럼 나는 것 마냥 빨랐어요.
하지만 고슴도치의 아내는 자기 자리에 조용히 머물러있었죠.
그리하여 토끼가 밭 꼭대기에 도착했을 때, 이번엔 고슴도치 본인이 ‘난 벌써 왔지롱!’라며 소리치지 않겠어요.
하지만 까짓것 꼭지가 돈 토끼는 이렇게 외쳤죠.
“한 판 더 해, 한 번 더 달리자고.”
“그 좋지,”라며 고슴도치가 대답했어요. “당신이 원하는 만큼 갈려보자고.” 
그리하여 토끼는 그렇게 73번이나 달리기를 하였지만, 그때마다 고슴도치가 이겼지 뭐예요, 밭의 시작점이든 끝점이든 매번 토끼가 가 보면, 고슴도치와 고슴도치의 아내가 번갈아 가며 “난 벌써 왔지롱!”라고 외쳤지요.
하지만 74번째 달리기에선 토끼도 더는 결승점에 도착할 수가 없었답니다. 밭 중간지점을 뛰어가던 도중 쓰러져 입에서 피를 토하며 그 길로 숨을 거두고 말았기 때문이지요.
그리하여 고슴도치는 프랑스 금화 1개와 브랜디 한 명을 거머쥐고서 자신의 아내보고 “밭고랑에서 나와도 돼”라고 소리쳤지요.
둘은 그렇게 크게 만족하며 집으로 돌아갔답니다.
그들이 죽지 않았다면 지금도 여전히 거기서 잘 살고 있을 거랍니다.
이것이 바로 고슴도치가 어떻게 북스테후데(독일 북부 함부르크 근처의 도시이름.) 언덕에서의 달리기 시합에서 토끼로 하여금 죽을 때까지 달리게 만들었는지 하는 방법이랍니다.
그 후 그 어떤 토끼도 감히 북스테후데(독일 북부 도시이름)의 고슴도치와 달리기 시합을 벌인 생각일랑은 꿈도 꾸지 못했답니다.
하지만 이 이야기의 교훈은 첫째로는, 어떤 누구도, 비록 그 자신이 굉장한 사람일지라도, 자기보다 아래로 보이는 사람을 깔봐선 안 된다는 교훈이에요, 심지어 그게 고슴도치일지라도 말이죠.
그리고 두 번째 교훈은, 남자는 결혼만큼은 자신과 신분이 같고 겉모습도 닮은 아내를 맞이해야한다는 거예요.
즉 고슴도치를 본 사람은 누구든 고슴도치의 아내도 고슴도치일 거라 생각하는 이치이죠. 그게 바로 세상이치랍니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「토끼와 고슴도치」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「토끼와 고슴도치」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter188.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



189. 물렛가락과 북과 바늘



어릴 적에 아빠 엄마를 잃은 가엾은 소녀가 있었어요.
그녀의 ‘대모’(세례식 때 참석한 여성 후견인)가 마을 끝자락에 작은 집에서 홀로 살고 계셨지요. 대모는 실을 만들고 짜서 바느질 해 먹고 살고 있었지요.
할머니가 이 오갈 데 없는 아이를 거둬 일도 가르쳐주고 착하게 자랄 수 있게 교육시켜주었어요.
소녀가 열다섯 살이 되던 해, 할머니가 병이 드셔 아이를 베갯머리로 불러 말했어요.
“사랑하는 딸아, 아무래도 난 곧 갈 거 같구나. 이 작은 집을 네게 물려주마. 이 집이 너를 바람과 날씨로부터 지켜줄 거란다. 그리고 내 ‘물렛가락’(실이 감기는 쇠꼬챙이)과 북과 바늘도 줄게, 이걸로 양식(빵)을 구할 수 있을 거란다.”
그런 다음 할머니는 소녀의 머리에 두 손을 얹으시곤 축복을 내려주시며 말했어요.
“마음에 하느님을 간직하고 있거라, 그럼 모든 일이 잘 될 거란다.”
그 후 즉시 할머니가 두 눈을 감으시며 세상을 떠나셨어요.
소녀는 관을 뒤따르며 몹시도 우는 것으로 할머니에 대한 존경의 마음을 표시했어요. 
아가씨는 이제 혼자 그 작은 집에서 살게 되었어요.
그녀는 근면했기에 실도 만들고 베도 짜고 바느질을 열심히 했어요. 대모(할머니)의 축복이 있었기에 그녀가 하는 모든 일이 잘 풀렸어요.
방에 놓인 아마(=천)는 저절로 느는 것 같았고요, 그녀가 옷이든 양탄자든 또는 셔츠를 만들기만 하면 곧바로 구매자가 나타나 후한 값을 쳐주었기에, 그녀는 부족함 없이 생활할 수 있었고 심지어 다른 이들을 도울 수도 있었답니다.
이때쯤 왕자님이 나라를 여행하며 신부를 찾고 있었어요.
그는 가난한 신부도 아니고 그렇다고 부자인 신부도 원치 않았어요.
그러면서도 그는 이렇게 말했어요.
“가장 가난하고 동시에 가장 부자인 신부를 맞이하겠다.”
그는 그 아가씨가 사는 마을에도 도착해 “여기가 어디요? 그리고 이 마을에서 가장 부자면서도 가장 가난한 여인은 누구요?”라고 물었어요.
사람들은 가장 부자 아가씨의 이름을 알려주었고, 가장 가난한 아가씨의 이름으로는 마을 끝자락에서 자그마한 집에서 살고 있는 바로 그 아가씨의 이름을 알려주었어요. 
부잣집 아가씨는 화려한 옷을 입고 현관문 앞에 앉아 있다, 왕자님이 다가오자, (부잣집 아가씨가) 일어나 무릎과 상체를 굽히고 인사를 드리며 맞이해주었어요.
왕자는 그녀를 한번 쳐다보더니 아무 말도 않고 그냥 말머리를 돌려 가버렸어요.
왕자가 가난한 아가씨의 집에 도착해보니, 그녀는 현관문에 서서 대기하지 않고 자신의 작은 방에 앉아 있었어요.
왕자가 말을 멈춰 세우고 환한 태양처럼 빛이 나는 창문 안을 들여다보니, 그 아가씨가 물레에 앉아 바삐 실을 만들고 있었어요.
그녀가 고개를 들었다 왕자님이 들여다보고 있는 걸 보곤 얼굴이 새빨개져 두 눈을 떨구며 계속 실만 만들었지요.
그 순간 실이 제대로 만들어졌는가는 저는 모르겠네요.
하지만 그녀는 왕자님이 말을 타고 가실 때까지 계속 실을 만들었어요. 
왕자님이 가신 다음 그녀가 창가로 와 환히 열며 말했어요.
“이 방 참 덥네!”
하지만 그녀의 눈은 왕자님이 쓴 모자에 꽂힌 하얀색 깃털들이 안보일 때까지 그의 뒷모습을 쫓고있었어요.
그런 다음 그녀는 자신의 방에서 다시 일을 계속하려고 앉아 실을 계속 만들었어요. 그러면서 할머니가 작업하실 때면 종종 말씀하셨던 말씀이 문득 떠올라 자신도 이렇게 노래를 불러보았어요…
“물렛가락아, 내 물렛가락아, 어여(=어서), 서둘러 뒤따라가서, 원컨대, 구혼자를 여기 내 집으로 데려오려무나.”
그리고 무슨 일이 벌어졌을 거 같으세요?
그 즉시 물렛가락이 그녀의 손에서 펄쩍 튀어나와 문으로 나갔지 뭐예요, 그녀가 당황해 화들짝 일어나 뒤쫓아보았지만, 물렛가락은 뭐가 그리 즐거운지 뒤로 빛나는 황금빛 실을 드리우며 드넓은 들판 속으로 춤을 추면서 나아갔어요.
오래지 않아 물렛가락이 시야에서 사라지자, 그녀는 이제 물렛가락 없이 ‘베 짜는 북’을 쥐고 자신의 베틀에 앉아 베를 짜기 시작했어요.
하지만 물렛가락은 실이 다 풀어질 때까지 계속 춤을 추며 나아가 왕자님께 닿았답니다.
“내가 지금 뭘 보는 거지?”라며 그가 소리쳤어요. “확실히 이 물렛가락이 내게 길을 알려주려는 거 같은데!”
왕자님이 말머리를 돌려 황금 실을 뒤따라가 보았어요.
하지만 아가씨는 여전히 작업을 하며 노래를 부르고 있었죠.
“북아, 내 북아, 오늘 베 참 잘 짜네. 그럼 어여(어서) 가 구혼자를 내게로 인도해주려무나.”
그 즉시 북이 그녀의 손에서 튀어나와 문으로 가더니, 문지방 앞에서 이 세상 어떤 남자의 눈도 사로잡을 수 있는 아름다운 양탄자를 짜기 시작했어요.
백합과 장미가 그 양탄자 양쪽 옆에서 피어났고요, 중앙부 황금 땅엔 초록의 나뭇가지들이 솟아올랐고요, 그 밑에선 산토끼와 토끼들이 뛰어다녔고요, 수사슴과 암사슴이 서로 고개를 마주감고 있었고요, 화사한 빛깔의 새들이 그 위 나뭇가지들 위에 앉아 정다운 노래를 부르는 듯 했어요.
북이 이리 뛰어넘고 저리 뛰어넘고 작업을 계속함에 따라 양탄자도 제 모습을 완성해갔어요.
한편 북이 튀어나가자 아가씨는 다시 앉아 바느질을 했어요.
그녀는 바늘을 쥐고서 노래를 불렀어요.
 “바늘아, 뾰족하고 잘 드는 내 바늘아, 구혼자가 오시도록 방청소를 해주려무나.”
그러자 바늘이 그녀의 손가락에서 폴짝 튀어 오르더니 번개처럼 빠르게 방 온 구석을 날아다녔어요.
마치 눈에 안 보이는 영혼들이 일을 하는 양, 그 즉시 식탁과 긴 의자들에 초록색 천이 놓이고, 의자엔 뽀송한 솜털이 놓이고, 비단 커튼들이 창문에 달렸답니다.
바늘이 방을 꾸미기를 마치자마자, 창문을 통해 왕자님의 새하얀 깃털(모자 위의 깃털)들이 보였어요.
왕자님은 물렛가락이 풀어놓은 황금 실을 따라 여기까지 오신 거였답니다.
왕자님이 말에서 내려 양탄자를 밟고 집으로 들어왔어요.
그가 방에 들어서자, 가난한 옷을 입은 그 처녀가 서 있는데, 어찌나 아름다운지 잎들로 둘러싸인 한 떨기 장미 같이 빛나고 있었어요.
“그대야말로 가장 가난하면서도 또한 가장 부자요.”
그러면서 왕자님이 그녀에게 말했어요.
“나와 함께 궁으로 가 나의 신부가 되어주시오.”
그녀는 아무 말 없이 손을 내밀었지요.
왕자님은 그녀의 손등에 키스를 한 다음 그녀를 데리고 자신의 말에 태우고 궁전으로 가셨답니다.
거기서 그들의 결혼식이 아주 성대하게 거행되었답니다.
그리고 그들의 사랑을 이어준 물렛가락과 북과 바늘은 보물실에 잘 넣어져 소중히 보관되었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「물렛가락과 북과 바늘」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「물렛가락과 북과 바늘」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter189.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



190. 농부와 악마



옛날에 그가 부린 장난들이 아주 많이 사람들 입에 오르내린 현명하고 영악한 농부가 한 명 살고 있었어요.
전해오는 얘기들 중 최고는, 그가 어떻게 악마를 만나 골탕을 먹일 수 있었는가 하는 거였답니다.
하루는 농부가 밭일을 열심히 하고 날이 저물어 집으로 돌아갈 채비를 하고 있는데, 밭 한 가운데에 불타는 석탄 더미들이 보이는 거예요, 깜짝 놀란 농부가 그리로 가보니 타고 있는 선탄들 위에 작고 새까만 악마가 하나 앉아 있지 뭐예요.
“넌 내 보물 위에 앉아 있어!”라며 농부가 말했지요.
“그래, 맞아,”라며 그 악마가 대꾸했어요. “네 평생 본 것보다 더 많은 금과 은을 가진 보물 위에 앉아 있지!”
“내 밭에 있는 보물은 내 거라고.”라며 농부가 말했어요. 
“너의 것이야,”라며 악마가 말했어요. “이제부터 2년 동안 이 밭에서 나는 것의 절반을 꼬박꼬박 내게 받친다면 말이야. 난 돈은 충분해, 그러니 이젠 땅에서 나는 걸 가지고 싶어.”  
농부가 그 거래에 동의했어요.
“하지만 분배 과정에 다툼이 없도록,”라며 그가 말했지요. “땅 위에서 나는 것은 네가 가지고, 땅 밑에서 나는 건 내가 가지기로 하지.”
악마가 그 말에 매우 흡족해 했어요, 하지만 약삭빠른 농부는 ‘순무’(먹는 무의 일종. 사진링크▶ https://goo.gl/VPOB5B ) 씨를 뿌렸답니다.
이제 수확할 시기가 되자, 악마가 오더니 자기 몫의 경작물을 가져가려 했어요.
하지만 밭엔 노랗게 시든 이파리들밖에 없었죠. 그러는 동안 농부는 기쁨에 겨워하며 자신의 순무들을 죄다 파 갔답니다.
“좋아 이번 한 번은 네가 이겼다,”라며 악마가 말했어요. “하지만 내년엔 그리 안 될걸. 땅 위에서 나는 걸 네가 가져, 난 땅 밑에서 나는 걸 가질 테니.”
“좋아,”라며 농부가 대꾸했어요. 
하지만 씨 부릴 시기가 되자 농부가 뿌린 씨는 순무 씨가 아니라 밀 씨였답니다. 
곡물이 자라 익자, 농부가 밭으로 가 밀을 땅 바로 위에까지 싹뚝싹뚝 다 잘라 가버렸지요.
그래서 악마가 왔을 때는, 밀의 ‘그루터기’(곡식을 베고 남은 밑동) 밖엔 없었답니다. 
이에 격노한 악마는 바위들의 갈라진 틈 속으로 떨어지고 말았답니다.
“이게 바로 악마를 골려먹는 방법이지.”라며 농부가 말하더니 자신의 보물들을 가지고 집으로 돌아가 버렸답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「농부와 악마」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「농부와 악마」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter190.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



191. 식탁 위의 빵 부스러기



시골뜨기가 하루는 자신의 귀여운 강아지들에게 말했어요.
“거실로 들어와 뭐 좀 먹으려무나, 지금 식탁 위에 빵 부스러기들이 있거든, 너희 안주인은 지금 이웃집들을 방문하러 출타중이시니까.”
그러자 귀여운 녀석(개)들이 말했어요.
“아뇨, 아니에요, 저희들은 들어가지 않을 거예요, 안주인님이 아시면 저희를 혼내실 거거든요.”
시골뜨기가 말했어요.
“그녀 모르게 하면 되지. 어서 들어와. 무엇보다 그녀는 너희에게 좋은 먹이를 절대 안 주지 않니.”
그러자 귀여운 녀석(개)들이 다시 말했어요.
“아뇨, 아니라니까요, 저희들은 절대 들어가지 않을 테예요, 절대 안 들어가요.”
하지만 시골뜨기가 어찌나 달래는지 그만 녀석들도 넘어가 식탁위로 올라가 빵 부스러기들을 마음껏 먹어치웠답니다.
하지만 바로 그때 안주인이 도착했고, 그녀는 다짜고짜 회초리를 집더니 개들을 마구 때리며 사납게 다루었어요.
집 밖으로 나온 귀여운 녀석들이 그 시골뜨기에게 말했어요.
“봐요, 봐, 보라고요, 봐, 보셨잖아요?”
그러자 시골뜨기가 웃으며 말했어요.
“뭘, 뭘, 뭘 말이니, 그럼 그것도 예상 못했단 말이니?”
그리하여 그들(강아지들)은 떠날 수밖에 없었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「식탁 위의 빵 부스러기」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「식탁 위의 빵 부스러기」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter191.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



192. 바다 민달팽이



옛날 옛적에 공주님이 한 분 살고 계셨어요.
공주님은 자신의 성 성벽 위에 덧쌓은 담에 12개의 요술 창문들을 가지고 있었어요. 그 요술 창문을 통해 밖을 내다보면 모든 게 다 보였죠.
그녀는 한 번씩 거기 올라가 내다보며 자신의 온 왕국을 살폈죠.
첫 번째 요술창문을 통해 내다보면 어떤 사람도 또렷이 잘 보였고요, 두 번째 요술창문을 통해 내다보면 훨씬 더 잘 보였고요, 세 번째 요술창문은 더 더 잘 보여, 그렇게, 열두 번째 요술창문까지 가면 땅 위나 땅 아래에 있는 모든 것들이 보였기에, 그녀는 세상의 비밀을 다 알았죠.
게다가, 공주는 도도한 아가씨여서 누구에게도 시집가지 않고 자신과만 온전히 지내길 바랐죠. 그래서 “누구든 나로부터 몸을 숨길 수 있는 자를 내 남편으로 삼겠다. 하지만 그게 불가능하다는 걸 알게 될 게다.”라는 선포를 하기에 이르렀어요.
이에 사람들이 지원을 했지만 그녀에게 다 발각되어 머리가 잘려 말뚝 위에 꽂히고 말았죠.
그렇게 비명횡사한 자들의 머리가 97개였지요. 그 머리들이 성 앞에 즐비하게 서 있다 보니 이젠 한동안 아무도 나서는 자들이 없었어요.
공주는 기뻐서 생각했어요.
“이제야 평생 자유롭게 살 수 있게 되었네.”
그때 세 형제가 그녀 앞에 나타나 자신들의 운을 시험해보겠다 자청하고 나섰지요.
첫째 형은 자신이 ‘석회 항아리’(짐승의 가죽을 담아 털을 없애는 데 사용하는 항아리) 속에 숨으면 그녀에게 들키지 않을 거라 믿었죠.
하지만 그녀가 첫 번째 요술창문을 통해 내다보자마자 바로 그가 보였고, 그는 끌려나와 목이 잘리고 말았죠.
둘째 형은 성의 지하실로 기어들어갔지만, 이도 또한 첫 번째 요술창문을 통해 바로 그녀에게 발각돼 운명을 다하게 되었지요.
이리하여 이들의 머리가 말뚝에 꽂힌 98번째와 99번째 머리가 되었답니다.
상황이 이렇게 되자 막내가 그녀 앞으로 나서며 생각할 시간은 하루만 달라 간청했어요. 또한 두 번째로 발각될 때까진 자비를 베풀어 죽이지 말라 빌었지요. 하지만 세 번째에도 자신이 실패한다면 그땐 순순히 목을 내밀겠다고 다짐했답니다.
막내가 유독 미남이고 빌고 또 빌기에 공주가 말했어요.
“좋아요, 기회를 드리죠. 하지만 성공하시진 못하실 거예요.” 
다음날 그는 어디에 숨으면 들키지 않을지를 오랫동안 곰곰이 생각했지만 모두 다 헛수고였죠.
그래서 그는 총을 꼬나들고 사냥을 나갔어요.
까마귀 한 마리가 보이자 그가 총을 집어 들곤 조준을 해 막 발사 하려는 순간, 다급해진 새가 소리쳤어요.
“쏘지 마요. 이 은혜는 갚아 드릴게요.”
그가 다시 총을 내려놓고 가던 길을 계속 가니 이번엔 수면 깊숙이 사는 큰 물고기가 때마침 물 위로 몸을 내밀고 있었어요.
그때 그가 조준하자, 물고기가 다급하게 외쳤어요.
“쏘지 마요. 이 은혜는 갚아 드릴게요.”
그가 다시 물고기를 풀어주곤 가던 길을 계속 가니 이번엔 다리를 절뚝거리는 여우 한 마리와 마주치게 되었어요.
그가 총을 발사했지만 빗 맞추고 말았지요.
여우가 소리쳤어요.
“그러지 마시고 이리로 오셔서 제발 제 발에 꽃인 가시나 좀 뽑아주세요.”
그가 그리 했지요. 하지만 곧 그는 여우를 죽여 가죽을 얻고 싶어졌답니다. 
그러자 여우가 다급히 말했어요.
“제발, 그러지 마세요. 이 은혜는 잊지 않을게요.”
젊은이는 여우를 풀어주었지요.
그런 다음 저녁이 되어 그는 집으로 돌아왔어요.
다음날 그가 숨어야 하는 시간이 왔어요, 하지만 도대체 머리를 아무리 굴려보아도 어디에 숨어야 안 들킬지 감도 안 잡히는 거예요.
그는 숲으로 가 그 까마귀에게 말했어요.
“내가 너를 살려주었잖니, 그러니 내가 어디에 숨으면 안 들킬지 말해주렴. 공주님이 나를 못 보시게 말이야.”
까마귀가 고개를 숙이곤 한참을 생각에 생각을 거듭하다 결국 까옥까옥 말을 했어요.
“생각이 났어용.”
까마귀는 자신의 둥지에서 알 한 개를 꺼내 두 조각으로 자르더니 젊은이를 안에 숨기고 그 알껍데기를 다시 닫아버리고 온전한 알로 만들어버렸지요. 이리하여 젊은이는 알 속에 안전하게 숨을 수 있었답니다. 
공주님은 첫 번째 요술 창문을 통해 밖을 내다보았지만 그가 보이지 않았어요. 그렇게 다른 요술 창문들을 통해서도 그가 보이지 않자 불안해지기 시작했지요.
하지만 열한 번째 요술창문을 통해 보니 그가 보였어요.
공주님은 명령을 내려 그 까마귀를 총으로 쏘아 죽이게 하고는 알을 가져오게 해 깨뜨려버렸어요. 그러자 젊은이가 튀어나왔죠.
공주가 말했어요.
“첫 번째니 봐준다. 하지만 다음번엔 더 잘 숨지 않으면 목숨이 위험해!”
다음날 그는 호수로 가 그 물고기를 불러내 말했어요.
“나 좀 살려줘라. 내가 어디 숨어야 공주님의 눈에 띄지 않겠니.”
물고기가 잠시 생각하더니 마침내 이렇게 소리쳤어요.
“생각났어용! 제가 당신을 삼켜 제 배 속에 감출게용.”
물고기는 그를 삼키더니 호수 바닥으로 내려가 꽁꽁 숨었어요.
공주는 요술 창문으로 내다봤지만 그가 안 보였어요, 그리고 심지어 열한 번째 요술 창문을 통해서도 그가 보이지 않자 가슴이 덜컥했지요. 하지만 마침내 열두 번째 요술창문으로 보니 그가 보였답니다.
공주가 명령을 내려 그 물고기를 잡아 죽이게 했더니 젊은이가 나왔어요.
이때 젊은이의 심정이 어떠했는지는 모두가 상상가능하지요.
공주가 말했어요.
“두 번째니 용서해주겠다. 하지만 세 번째로 발각되면 네 머리는 100번째 말뚝에 걸리게 될 것이다.”
마지막 날, 젊은이가 무거운 걸음걸이로 들판으로 나아가 그 여우를 만났어요.
“넌 숨는 데는 도사잖니.”라며 그가 말했어요. “나 좀 살려줘라. 내가 어디 숨어야 공주님이 나를 발견할 수 없을지 좀 알려줘.”
“참 어려운 일이네요.”라며 여우가 대답하더니 아주 곰곰이 생각에 생각을 거듭했어요.
마침내 여우가 소리쳤어요.
“생각났다!”
여우는 젊은이와 함께 샘으로 가더니 자신이 먼저 풍덩 빠진 다음 시장에서 동물들을 파는 상인으로 변해 나왔어요.
여우는 젊은이도 풍덩 물속으로 들어가게 했지요.
젊은이는 작고 예쁜 ‘바다 민달팽이’(=‘군소’=‘바다의 토끼.’ 바다 민달팽이는 귀부분이 토끼를 닮아 ‘바다의 토끼’라고도 함)로 변해 나왔답니다.
상인은 시내로 가 이 예쁘고 작은 동물을 진열했지요. 그러자 수많은 사람들이 모여들어 너도 나도 구경에 여념이 없었답니다.
결국 소문을 듣고 공주님 또한 오셨는데 바다 민달팽이가 너무도 예뻐 마음에 드신 공주님이 그걸 후한 돈을 치르시고 상인에게서 샀어요.
바다 민달팽이를 공주님에게 건네지 전, 상인은 바다 민달팽이에게 말했어요.
“공주님이 요술 창문으로 가시거든, 얼른 그녀의 땋은 머리카락들 속에 기어들어 숨으세요.”
이제 그를 찾을 시간이 되자 공주가 찾기 시작했어요.
공주는 요술 창문들을 통해 차례대로 밖으로 내다봤지만 그는 보이지 않았어요. 심지어 열두 번째 요술 창문으로도 그가 보이지 않자 공주님은 아주 화가 나 분통이 터진 나머지 열두 번째 요술 창문을 아주 난폭하게 닫고 말았는데 그 바람에 모든 요술 창문들이 천개의 조각들로 깨어지고 온 성이 후들들 떨리고 말았지요.
공주가 방으로 돌아와 보니 바다 민달팽이가 자신의 땋은 머리카락들 밑에 있는 게 느껴지는 거예요.
그래서 그녀가 그걸 붙잡아 사정없이 바닥에다 내동댕이치며 소리를 질렀어요.
“썩 꺼져, 내 눈 앞에서 썩 꺼지라고!”
바다 민달팽이는 전속력으로 그 상인에게 달려갔지요. 그런 다음 그 둘은 서둘러 그 샘으로 가 둘 다 풍덩하고 빠져 다시 원래의 모습으로 돌아왔답니다.
젊은이는 여우가 너무도 고마워서 말했어요.
“그 까마귀와 물고기를 너와 비교하면 완전 바보들이었어요. 네가 꾀돌이란 건 아무도 부정할 수 없을 거야!”
젊은이는 곧장 궁전으로 갔어요.
공주님도 그를 맞이할 준비를 다 하시곤 자신의 운명을 받아들이셨어요.
결혼식은 성대히 거행되었고, 이제 젊은이는 왕이 되어 왕국을 통치하셨답니다.
하지만 그는 절대 그녀에게 자신이 세 번째로 숨었었던 장소를 말하지 않았어요, 그리고 누가 자신을 도왔는지도 입도 뻥긋하지 않았지요.
그녀는 그 모두를 그 혼자 힘으로 다 한 줄 믿었고, 그래서 남편에 대한 큰 존경심을 품게 되었답니다.
그녀가 속으로 이렇게 생각했거든요.
‘그이는 나보다 능력자 셔.’
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「바다의 토끼 (바다 민달팽이)」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「바다의 토끼 (바다 민달팽이)」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter192.html

이 동화의 본래 제목은 ‘군소’입니다. 군소는 바다 민달팽이입니다. 바다 민달팽이는 예뻐요. 물론 못 생긴 것도 있지만^^ 특히 군소의 귀 부분이 토끼의 귀와 비슷하다고 하여 군소를 보통 ‘바다의 토끼’라고 부르기도 한다네요. 그래서 이 동화의 제목이 “바다의 토끼”, 즉 군소인 것입니다. 남자주인공이 ‘바다의 토끼’인 군소로 변신하거든요. (‘바다의 토끼’=군소. 같은 말임) 다만 군소란 단어가 어려워 ‘바다 민달팽이’로 해석했습니다.^^

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



193. 최고의 도둑



하루는 노인과 그의 아내가 누추한 집 앞에 앉아 잠시 일손을 놓고 휴식들을 취하고 있는데, 난데없이 검정 말 네 마리가 끄는 화려한 마차가 그들 쪽으로 달려오더니 부자차림의 사내 한 명이 내리는 거예요.
농부가 일어나 그 권세가에게 다가가 “뭐 필요하신 거라고 있으신지요?”라고 물었어요.
손님이 노인에게 손을 내밀더니 말했어요.
“바라는 건 없습니다, 다만 시골 밥상 한 번 먹어보고 싶군요. 늘 즐겨먹으시던 그 감자 요리 말입니다. 준비해주시겠다면 즐거이 먹겠습니다.”
농부는 미소를 보이더니 말했어요.
“네, 아무래도 당신은 백작이거나 왕자님 아니시면 공작이신 모양이군요. 귀족 분들이 종종 그런 음식상을 바라실 때가 있지요, 해드리리다.”
아내가 부엌으로 가 감자를 씻어 갈기 시작하더니 나중엔 둥글게 말아서 시골사람들이 즐겨 먹는 걸 만들었지요.
아내가 바삐 요리를 하는 동안, 농부가 손님에게 말했어요.
“잠시 정원으로 드시지요, 제가 아직 해둘 일이 좀 남아서요.”
그는 정원에 구멍 몇 개를 이미 파놓은 상태였던지라, 거기에 나무 몇 그루를 심으려던 참이었지요.
“자녀가 없으시군요,”라며 손님이 말했어요. “도와줄 만한 이들은 없는 겁니까?”
“네,”라며 농부가 대답했어요. “사실, 아들놈이 한 명 있긴 있었는데, 오래전에 세상으로 나갔죠. 변변치 못한 놈이 머리가 좋고 이해가 빠르다 보니 배우는 게 고작 나쁜 짓들뿐이더군요. 그러다 결국 집을 나가버렸죠, 그 이후론 그 애 소식을 듣지 못했습니다.”
노인은 어린 나무 한 그루를 집더니 땅에 파놓은 구멍 속에다 넣고 그 옆에 말뚝 하나를 때려 박았지요. 그런 다음 흙을 파 넣고 단단히 밟아 주었답니다. 땅 위로 나온 나무줄기를 맨 위와 맨 아래 그리고 중간 이렇게 세 부분을 노끈으로 말뚝과 단단히 묶었어요.
“말해주십시오,”라며 손님이 말했어요. “왜 저기 저 구부러지고 울퉁불퉁한 나무는 묶지 않으신 겝니까, 저 구석에 있는 거 말입니다, 아래로 구부러져 거의 땅에 달라붙은 있는 거요, 저 나무도 말뚝을 밖고 세워놓으면 세워지지 않습니까?”
노인이 살짝 미소지어보이더니 말했어요.
“나리, 그리 말씀하실 수도 있지요, 아무래도 나리는 정원 일엔 서투시준요. 저기 저 나무는 너무 나이들고 모양이 이미 뒤틀린 후라 누구도 바로 펼 수 없답니다. 나무는 어릴 적에 모양을 잡아줘야 한답니다.”
“그게 꼭 아들교육과 같군요,”라며 손님이 말했어요. “어릴 적에 바로잡아주지 않음 싶지 않지요. 지금쯤이면 아드님도 다 커서 흉…해 있겠군요.”
“원체 오래전에 나가버린 녀석이라,”라며 노인이 대꾸했어요. “아마 그리돼 있을 겝니다.”
“그 애가 다시 돌아온다면 알아보실 방법이라도 있으신지요?”라며 손님이 물었어요. 
“얼굴로는 못 알아보지요,”라며 농부가 대꾸했어요. “다만 표식이 하나 있는데, 그 애 어깨 위에 ‘출생 모반’(점. 몽고반점 같은 선척적인 반점)이 하나 나 있습니다. 태어날 때부터 가진 반점이지요.”
그러자 손님이 자신의 외투를 벗더니 어깨를 드러내며 농부에게 그 반점을 보여주었지요.
“에구 세상에나!”라며 노인이 소리질렀어요. “정말 내 아들이구먼!” 아들에 대한 사랑에 심쿵한 거지요. “그렇지만,”라며 노인이 덧붙였어요. “어떻게 내 아들이 이리도 귀한 귀족이 되어 풍요를 누리면 산단 말인지? 이게 다 어찌 된 일이더냐?”
“아, 아빠,”라며 아들이 대답했어요. “어린 나무는 어릴 적에 말뚝에 묶어두지 않음 자라면서 구부러지죠, 이제 그 나무는 너무 나이 들어 다시 펴지지 않는 답니다. 그러니 전 어떻겠습니까? 전 이제 도둑이 되었습니다, 그것도 최고의 도둑이요, 놀라지 마세요. 이제 제겐 열쇠든 자물쇠든 다 필요 없답니다, 제가 원하기만 하면요. 저는 흔한 도둑들처럼 훔치지 않습니다, 저는 부자들의 남아도는 재산만 적당히 훔치거든요. 가난한 사람들 건 손도 대지 않습니다, 차라리 제가 그들에게 나눠줄 정도죠. 문제 될 거 같은 돈은 아예 손대 되지 않죠, 일단 손을 대면 절묘하고 빈틈없이 훔친답니다.”
“아아, 내 아들아,”라며 아빠가 말했어요. “전혀 즐겁게 들리지가 않는구나, 도둑은 그냥 도둑일 뿐이란다, 내가 말해주고 싶은 건 도둑들의 끝은 순탄치 않다는 게다.”
그래도 아빠는 아들을 데리고 엄마에게 갔어요.
그녀는 그게 자신의 아들이란 소릴 듣곤 기뻐서 울었어요. 하지만 아들이 최고의 도둑이 되었다는 말엔 저도 모르게 얼굴 위로 두 줄기 눈물이 또르르 흐르고 말았죠.
마침내 엄마가 말했어요.
“도둑이 됐다만, 그래도 내 장한 아들을 이 두 눈으로 다시 보니 좋구나.”
그들은 식탁에 앉았어요. 
그리고 그는 한동안 먹지 못했던 그 초라한 음식을 부모님과 함께 다시 들었답니다(먹었답니다). 
아빠가 말했어요. 
“저 성에 사시는 우리 주인, 백작님이 네가 커서 도둑이 될 줄 알았다면, 네 세례식 때 품에 널 안아주지 않았을 게다, 지금 들켰다간 단번에 널 교수대에 매달아 처형시킬 게다.”
“좋게 생각하세요, 아빠, 그는 저를 어쩌지 못해요, 왜냐면 저만이 제 기술을 알고 있거든요. 더구나 오늘 바로 그를 찾아가볼 생각이고요.”
저녁놀이 질 무렵, 최고의 도둑은 자신의 마차를 타고 그 성으로 향했어요.
백작이 그를 정중하게 맞이했어요, 왜냐면 그를 저명한 인물로 착각했거든요.
하지만 손님이 자신을 소개하자, 백작의 얼굴이 창백해지면 잠시 말문을 뚝 닫아버리더군요.
마침내 백작이 말했어요. 
“당신은 내 ‘대자’(종교적 후원을 약속한 아이)니, 정의 대신 자비를 베풀어, 후히 대해주리다. 하지만 최고의 도둑이 되셨다 그리도 자긍심에 취해 있으시니 내 시험을 한 번 내보리다. 만약 통과하지 못하면 당신은 밧줄 제조자의 딸(교수대)과 결혼하게 될 거요, 그럼 까마귀들의 축하 노래를 듣게 될 게요.”
“백작님,”라며 최고의 도둑이 대답했어요. “당신만큼이나 곤란한 세 가지를 생각해보시지요, 그럼 제가 하나씩 풀어보리다, 당신이 바라시는 대로 말입니다.”
백작이 몇 분 동안 생각하더니 말했어요.
“그럼, 우선, 내가 즐겨 타는 말을 훔쳐보시오, 내 마구간에서 말이오. 두 번째로, 내가 아내와 깔고 자는 침대 시트를 훔쳐보시오, 그것도 우리가 잠든 사이, 발각되지 않고 말이오, 덤으로, 아내가 낀 결혼반지도 훔쳐야하오. 마지막 세 번째로, 교회에서 목사님과 집사님을 훔쳐오시오. 내 미리 말해두는데, 목숨을 담보로하시는 일이니 신중히 잘 해보시구려.”
최고의 도둑은 가장 가까운 마을로 갔어요.
거기서 그는 농부할머니의 옷들을 사 입었어요.
그런 다음 얼굴을 갈색으로 칠하고 또한 살에 주름살도 그렸어요. 그랬더니 그 누구도 그를 알아보지 못했답니다.
그런 다음 그는 작은 통을 오래된 헝가리 포도주로 잔뜩 채웠는데 강력한 수면제도 같이 섞었답니다.
그는 그 술통을 바구니에 담아 어깨에 짊어 메고는 천천히 비틀비틀 백작의 성으로 향했어요.
그가 도착했을 땐 이미 날이 어둑어둑한 후였지요.
그는 안마당의 돌 위에 앉아 콜록콜록 기침을 했어요. 마치 천식에 걸린 노파처럼 말이죠. 그러면서 춥다는 듯 연신 두 손을 비벼댔답니다. 
마구간 정문에 병사 몇몇이 모닥불을 피워놓고 둥글게 앉아 있었지요. 그들 중 한 명이 할머니를 발견하더니 소리쳐 불렀어요.
“이리 오세요, 몸 좀 녹이세요, 할머니. 오늘밤 묵으실 만한 곳이 없음 이만한 곳도 없지요.”
노파가 비틀거리며 그들 쪽으로 가더니 등에 짊어지고 있던 바구니를 그들 앞에 내려놓았어요.
“그 작은 통엔 뭐가 든 겝니까, 노부인?”라며 한 병사가 물었어요. 
“맛좋은 포도주요,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “그걸로 먹고 살거든요, 돈을 주시거나 말씨를 이쁘게 하면 내 기꺼이 여러분들께도 한 잔씩 드리리다.”
“그거라면 우리들만 한 게 없지, 자 여기,”라며 그 병사가 말했어요. 
그가 한 잔 맛을 보더니 말했어요.
“그 참 포도주 기가 막히네, 완전 꿀맛이야, 한 잔만 더 주쇼.”
그렇게 또 한잔을 채우니 옆에 있던 무리들이 덩달아 자신들도 좀 맛 좀 보자고 말하고 나섰어요.
“이보게, 동료들,”라며 그들 중 한 명이 마구간에 있는 병사들에게 큰소리로 말했어요. “이리와 보게. 여기 정말 할머니 연세(나이)만큼이나 오래되고 맛좋은 포도주가 있다네. 목도 좀 축이고, 위(배)도 따뜻하게 했더니 이거 원 모닥불보다 훨 낫구먼.”
노파가 자신의 술통을 들고 마구간 안으로 들어갔어요.
병사들 중 한 명은 이미 안장(사람이 탈 수 있게 말의 등에 얹는 도구)이 매어진 말에 앉아 있었어요. 그리고 또 한 병사는 손으로 말의 고삐(손에 잡는 줄)를 쥐고 있었고요, 세 번째 병사는 두 손으로 말의 꼬리를 꼭 붙잡고 있었답니다.
그녀가 술통이 바닥을 보일 때까지 삭다 비워가며 그들을 퍼 맸었어요(먹였어요).
머지않아 말의 고삐(줄)를 잡고 있던 병사의 손이 뚝 떨어지더니 그가 쓰러지며 쿨쿨 코를 곯기 시작했어요. 말의 꼬리를 손으로 잡고 있던 다른 병사도 바닥에 드러누우며 앞서 병사보다 훨씬 크게 코를 곯기 시작했지요.
말의 안장에 앉아있던 병사만은 그래도 여전히 앉아 있었는데, 이미 고개를 말의 목에 닿을 듯 푹 숙인 상태로 마치 대장간의 고함소리처럼 입에서 크아크아 소리를 내뿜으며 자고 있었죠.
밖에 있던 병사들은 이미 한참 전에 모두 바닥에 드러누워 자느라 꿈쩍도 하지 않고 있었죠, 모르는 사람이 보면 죽은 줄 알 정도로 말이죠.
성공이 눈앞에까지 온 최고의 도둑은, 우선 말의 고삐를 잡고 있었던 그 병사의 손엔 다른 줄 하나를 쥐어주고, 말의 꼬리를 붙잡고 있었던 병사의 손엔 말을 씻는 짚수세미(밀짚)를 하나 쥐어주었지요.
그럼 말안장에 저렇게 끝까지 앉아 있는 저 병사는 어찌해야할까요?
그는 그렇다고 그 병사를 바닥에 패대기치고 싶진 않았어요. 그랬다간 그 병사가 깨서 고함을 지르며 일을 그르칠 테니까요.
그때 좋은 생각이 떠올른 그가 말안장의 배띠(말의 배에 묶는 띠)를 풀어 벽에 걸린 고리에다 단단히 끈 두서너 개로 단단히 묶었죠. 그런 다음 자고 있는 병사를 살살 들어 기둥에다 붙이고 줄로 꽁꽁 묶어놓았죠.
말을 묶고 있던 줄도 금방 풀었답니다. 하지만 이대로 돌로 포장된 마당으로 말을 타고 나갔다간 온 성 전치에 소리가 다 들릴 테니, 그는 일단 말의 발굽들을 낡은 헝겊들로 감싸고 조심스레 말을 밖으로 끄집어내 올라탄 다음 총총 사라졌지요.
날이 밝자, 최고의 도둑은 훔친 말을 타고 성으로 전속력으로 달려왔어요.
막 깨어난 백작이 그 광경을 창문을 통해 다 보게 되었지요.
“좋은 아침입니다, 백작 나라,”라며 최고의 도둑이 소리쳤어요. “여기 당신의 말이 있습니다, 제가 어제 마구간에서 안전하게 훔쳐 내온 거지요! 한번 가 보십지요, 당신의 병사들이 얼마나 곤히 잠들어 있는지를요. 특히 마구간에 가보시면, 당신의 파수꾼들이 얼마나 곤한 휴식을 취하고 있는지를 보시게 될 겁니다.”
백작은 그저 웃을 수밖에 없어 말했어요.
“일단 이번 시험은 성공적으로 통과했네, 하지만 두 번째 난간(시험)은 쉽지 않을 걸세. 내 미리 경고하건데 자네가 내 앞에 도둑으로 나타나는 순간 난 자넬 한 명의 도둑으로 대우할 걸세(죽일 것일세).”
백작의 부인이 그 날 침대로 가 결혼반지를 손으로 꼭 감싸 안으며 잠이 들었답니다.
백작이 말했지요.
“문이며 열쇠며 빗장(문 뒤에 가로 놓아 문을 닫는 막대기)이며 모두 잠갔다오, 게다가 난 그 도둑이 올 때까지 자지 않을 거요, 그는 저 창문으로만 들어올 수 있을 테니, 내 그때를 기다려 총을 쏘아 맞추리다.”
하지만 최고의 도둑은 밤이 되자 우선 교수대들로 가 매달려 있던 불쌍한 죄인 한 명을 바닥으로 내려뜨린 다음 등에 짊어매고 그 성으로 향했어요.
그런 다음 그는 사다리를 침실에 대고 타고 올라가는데, 우선 죽은 자의 머리가 그의 어깨 위에 오게 해 올라갔답니다.
그가 어느 정도 높이까지 올라가자 죽은 자의 머리가 창문에 보였어요, 침대에서 이를 지켜보고 있던 백작이 권총을 발사했지요.
그 즉시 최고의 도둑은 그 불쌍한 죄수를 바닥에 떨어뜨리곤 자신도 구석에다 몸을 숨겼어요.
밤이었지만 달빛에 환했거든요, 그래서 최고의 도둑은 백작이 창문에 댄 그 사다리를 통해 내려오는 모습을 똑똑히 관찰할 수 있었죠.
백작은 다 내려오더니 죽은 자의 시신을 정원으로 끌고 가더니 아무래도 묻으려는 생각인지 땅에 구멍을 파기 시작했지요.
‘이제야,’라며 최고의 도둑이 생각했지요. ‘기회가 찾아왔군.’
그는 구석에서 재빨리 나와 사다리를 타고 곧장 백작 부인의 침실로 들어갔어요.
“여보,”라며 그가 백작 목소리를 흉내 내며 말하기 시작했어요. “도둑이 죽었다오, 하지만 무엇보다 그는 내 ‘대자’(종교적인 후원자)였지 않소, 그래서 악당보단 밥벌레에 가깝던 사람인데, 땅엔 묻어주고 싶더군. 그래야 그의 부모님들께도 안 미안할 테고. 동일 트기 전에 묻어줄 생각이오, 남몰래 정원에 말이오. 내게 침대시트를 주시구려 그럼 내가 그를 그걸로 감싸 강아지처럼 묻어주리다.”
백작부인이 침대시트를 건네주었어요.
“그리고,”라며 최고의 도둑이 계속 말했어요. “그 반지도 내게 주시구려… 저 세상으로 가는 자의 무덤에 그거 하나라도 가져가라 말하고 싶어서 그러오.”
아내가 반박하려다 말고 손가락에서 반지를 꺼내 남편에게 건네주었어요.
도둑은 이 두 가지를 챙기고서 정원에서 땅 파는 백작이 작업을 다 마치기 전에 집에 안전하게 도착했답니다.
다음날 아침 최고의 도둑이 침대시트와 반지를 들고 나타났을 때, 백작의 긴 얼굴이 뻘쭘해지고 말았지요.
“당신 마법사요?”라며 백작이 말했어요. “내가 분명 자넬 땅에 묻었는데, 어찌 살아난 게요?”
“저를 묻으신 게 아니라,”라며 최고의 도둑이 말했어요. “교수대 죄인을 묻으신 겁니다.”
그가 자초지종을 백작에게 말해주었지요. 그러자 백작도 “자네 정말 똑똑하고 교활한 도둑이군.”라며 인정하지 않을 수 없었죠.
“하지만 아직 하나 남았네,”라며 백작이 덧붙였어요. “자넨 세 번째 임무도 마저 수행해야하네, 그걸 완수하지 못하면 말짱 헛수고지.”
최고의 도둑은 미소를 지으며 아무런 말이 없었죠.
밤이 깔리자, 최고의 도둑이 등에 기다란 자루를 이고 겨드랑이에도 한 보따리 짐을 끼고 손에 손전등 하나만 켜고 교회묘지로 들어갔어요. 자루에는 ‘게’(바닷가에 사는 게. 옆으로 기어 다니는 게. 영덕대‘게’)를 넣어가지고 갔고, 보따리엔 짧은 양초들을 담아가지고 갔지요.
그가 묘지에 앉더니 게 한 마리를 꺼집어 내 게의 등딱지에 양초를 붙였어요.
그런 다음 그가 그 짧은 양초에 불을 붙이곤 게를 땅바닥에 놓아주어 게가 이러 저리 기어 다니게 놓아두었어요.
그는 자루에서 두 번째 게도 꺼내더니 똑같은 방식으로 처리한 다음 자루에서 마지막 게를 꺼낼 때까지 반복했어요.
여기에 잇따라 그는 마치 수도사(수도원에서 수도 생활을 하는 사람)의 겉옷처럼 생긴 긴 검정 옷을 입고 턱엔 회색빛깔 턱수염도 하나 붙였지요.
결국 완벽한 변장에 성공한 그가 게들을 넣었었던 그 자루를 도로 집어 들곤 교회로 들어가 설교단으로 올라갔답니다.
탑에 있는 시계가 막 밤12시를 치고 있었죠. 마지막 종이 울리는 가운데, 최고의 도둑의 우레와 같고 찢어지는 듯한 목소리가 울려 퍼졌답니다.
“경청하라(귀를 기울여라), 죄 많은 자들아, 종말이 도래했도다! 최후의 날이 왔도다! 경청하라! 경청하라! 천국에 들길 바라는 자 자루 속으로 기어들지니. 난 천국의 문을 열고 닫는 베드로니라. 바꺝 교회 묘지에 죽은 자들이 헤매며 자신들의 뼈들을 모으고 있노라. 자, 어서, 이 자루로 기어들라. 세계의 파멸이 이제 막 도래하려하노니!”
그 고함소리는 온 마을에 울러퍼졌지요.
목사님과 집사님은 때마침 교회 가장 가까이에서 살고 있다 제일 먼저 그 고함소리를 듣게 되어 밖을 내다보았더니 정말로 불빛들이 교회 묘지를 이리저리 움직이고 있는 지라, ‘기어이 사단이 벌어졌구나!’라고 생각하기에 이르러 급히 교회로 들어갔지요.
그들은 잠시 설교를 들었어요. 
그때 집사님이 목사님을 팔꿈치로 슬쩍 찌르며 말했어요.
“최후의 날이 밝기 전에 함께 천국에 드는(가는) 것도 나쁘진 않습니다요.”
“진실로,”라며 목사님도 대답했어요. “제 생각도 그러합니다. 그럼 당신 생각도 그러하다면, 우리 함께 거기로 가봅시다.”
“네,”라며 집사님이 대답했어요. “그럼 목사님께서 먼저 앞장을 서시지요, 제가 따라 가리다.”
그리하여 목사님께서 먼저 설교단으로 오르셨고, 최고의 도둑이 자루를 벌려주자, 그 속으로 기어들어가셨어요. 그런 다음 집사님도 따라서 자루 속으로 들어갔지요.
최고의 도둑은 그 즉시 자루를 단단히 묶고는 가운데를 붙잡곤 설교단 계단을 퉁퉁 밟으며 내려왔어요. 두 바보님들의 머리가 계단에 퉁퉁 부딪힐 때마다 최고의 도둑이 소리쳤지요.
“우린 지금 산들을 넘고 있노라.”
그런 다음 최고의 도둑은 똑같은 방식으로 자루를 마을로 끌고 가다 물웅덩이들이 나올 때면 이렇게 소리쳤지요.
“우린 지금 젖은 구름들 속을 지나고 있노라.”
마침내 그가 자루를 끌고 성의 계단에 오를 때는 이렇게 소리쳤지요.
“우린 지금 천국의 계단을 오르고 있다네, 곧 천국의 바깥뜰에 다다를 수 있을 걸세.”
꼭대기 층까지 올라온 그가 자루를 비둘기장에 집어넣었고, 비둘기들이 푸드덕거리며 날뛰자 그가 말했지요.
“들어보거라, 천사들이 얼마나 반기는지, 그들의 날갯짓 소리로 진동을 하는구나!” 
그런 다음 그는 문을 닫고 나왔지요.
다음날 아침 그가 백작에게 가 “세 번째 임무도 완수했습니다. 목사님과 집사님을 교회에서 데리고 왔습니다.”라고 말씀드려졌지요.
“아니 그들을 어디다 둔 거요?”라며 백작이 물었어요. 
“그들은 지금 2층 비둘기…장에 있는 자루 안에 있습니다. 자신들은 지금 천국에 와 있노라 확신하고 있지요.”
백작이 일어나 몸소 가보니 최고의 도둑이 한 말이 모두 다 사실이었어요.
백작은 가둬져 있던 목사님과 집사님을 풀어준 다음 최고의 도독에게 말했지요.
“당신은 정말 최고의 도둑이오, 내기에서 당신이 모두 이기셨소. 내 이번엔 당신을 무사히 보내줄 테니 다신 내 땅을 밟지 마시오, 안 그랬다간 교수대의 이슬로 사라질지 아시구려.”
최고의 도둑은 자신의 부모님께 작별인사를 한 다음 드넓은 세상 속으로 다시 한 번 출발했답니다.
그의 이후 소식에 대해선 아무도 전해들은 바가 없었다고 하네요.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「최고의 도둑」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「최고의 도둑」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter193.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



194. 곡식의 이삭



옛날에는 사실 하느님께서도 몸소 땅을 걸어 다니셨지요.
땅이 기름지기도 지금보다 훨씬 더 굉장했답니다.
곡식의 ‘이삭’(열매가 달리는 부분)도 지금의 40배나 60배가 아니라, 4백배 내지는 5백배까지 더 많이 열렸답니다.
그래서 곡식은 줄기 바닥에서 꼭대기까지 죄다 열매가 열렸지요.
즉 줄기가 곧 ‘이삭’(열매가 달리는 부분)이었던 거예요.
이렇게 모든 곡식들이 풍성하게 열매를 맺다보니 사람들이 더는 그 귀중함을 모르고 하느님의 은혜를 망각하기 시작해, 서서히 무지하고 부주의해졌지요.
하루는 여인이 자신의 꼬마 애를 데리고 밀밭 옆을 지나가는데, 꼬마가 옆에서 달리다 그만 물웅덩이에 퐁당 빠져 옷을 더럽히고 말았어요.
이에 엄마가 아름답게 열매들을 맺고 있던 곡식의 이삭을 한 움큼 찢어내더니 그 이삭들로 아이의 옷을 닦았어요.
때마침 하느님께서 그 옆을 지나가시다 이 모습을 보시곤 역정(=화)을 내시며 말씀하셨지요.
“이제부터는 곡식 줄기에 더는 ‘열매’(=이삭)가 달리지 않을 것이다, 인간은 더는 천국의 선물을 받을 가치가 없노라.”
이 말씀을 들은 구경꾼들이 화들짝 놀라며 하느님 앞에 두 무릎을 꿇고 앉아, 제발 줄기에 계속 열매가 맺게 해 달라고 빌었어요, 사람이야 배은망덕하니 그렇다 쳐도 어찌 죄 없는 ‘새’(날아다니는 새)들까지 굶주려야하느냐고 빌고 또 빌었죠.
새들의 고통을 내다보신 하느님께서 그들을 불쌍히 여기시고 그 청을 받아주셨지요.
그리하여 ‘이삭’(=열매가 달리는 부분)은 지금처럼 곡식의 꼭대기에라도 남아있게 되었답니다. (ㅋㅋㅋ)
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「곡식의 이삭」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「곡식의 이삭」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter194.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



195. 무덤



어느 부자 ‘농장주’(농장을 경영하는 사람) 한 명이 어느 날 자신의 안마당에 서서 자신의 밭들이며 정원들을 찬찬히 들여다보며 서 있었어요.
곡식은 무럭무럭 자라고 있었고, 과일열매들은 주렁주렁 열매들을 맺고 있었지요.
올해 농사가 어찌나 풍년인지 거둬들인 수확물들로 넘쳐나 지붕 ‘서까래’(지붕의 뼈대. 사진링크▶ https://goo.gl/7vgHa5 )가 터져나가기 일보직전이었어요.
그런 다음 마구간으로 가보았지요. 거기엔 영양이 좋은 황소들과 살찐 암소들 그리고 빛깔 좋은 말들이 가득했어요.
마지막으로 그가 거실로 돌아와 돈이 가득 든 철제 금고에 눈길을 주었어요.
그가 자신의 부를 살피며 서 있자니, 갑자기 커다란 노크 소리가 들려왔어요.
그 노크 소리는 방문에서 나는 게 아니라, 그의 마음의 문에서 나는 소리였지요.
문이 열리고 무슨 말을 하나 그가 들어봤지요.
“넌 그 돈으로 가족을 챙겨봤냐? 가난한 사람들에게 먹을 걸 사줘봤냐? 굶주린 자에게 빵 하나 사줘봤냐? 가진 것에 만족을 해봤나, 아니지 더 가지려고 발버둥을 쳤더랬지, 항상?” 
그의 마음이 곧 대답을 했어요.
“나는 모질고 인정이 없이 살아왔다. 내 가족들에게도 인정을 베푼 적이 한 번도 없었다. 가난한 자가 다가오면 난 눈길을 돌렸다. 하느님을 마음에 담지 않고, 돈벌이에만 골몰했다. 하늘 아래 모든 재물이 내 것이 되더라도 난 아마 마음에 차지 않고 더 벌려했을 것이다.”
이 대답에 그의 마음이 철렁 내려앉았어요. 그의 두 무릎이 와들와들 떨리기 시작하더니 곧 털썩 주저앉고 말았죠.
그때 또 다른 노크 소리가 들려왔어요. 그건 그의 방문에서 나는 노크소리였어요.
그의 이웃인 가난한 남자가 찾아왔어요. 그는 수많은 아이들을 더는 먹일 게 없어 부자 농장주를 찾아왔던 거예요.
‘나도 알아,’라며 가난한 자가 생각했어요. ‘내 이웃은 부자야, 매우 부자며 모질지. 그가 나를 돕지 않을 거란 걸 잘 알아. 하지만 내 자식들이 빵을 달라 우는데 내가 지금 마다할 게 뭐 있겠어.’
그가 부자에게 말했어요.
“당신이 아무 것도 안 주리란 것을 알지만, 저는 지금 제 머리 위로 물이 차 들어오는 심정으로 여기 왔습니다요. 제 자식들이 굶고 있습니다, 제게 곡식 네 ‘그릇’(=되=1.8리터)만 꿔주십시오.”
부자가 그를 오래 쳐다보았어요. 그런 다음 한 줄기 자비의 빛줄기가 내려와 탐욕에 찬 이의 마음을 한 방울 녹이기 시작했지요.
“네 그릇(=되)을 빌려주지 않겠네.”라며 그가 대답했어요. “난 자네에게 여덟 그릇(되)을 주겠네, 다만 조건이 하나 있다네.”
“제가 뭘 하면 되죠?”라며 가난한 자가 말했어요. 
“내가 죽고 나면, 자네가 3일 밤 동안 내 무덤 옆에서 나를 지켜주게나.”
이 요청에 농부의 마음이 처음엔 뒤숭숭해졌지만, 워낙에 다급한 곡식인지라 선 듯 동의하고 말았어요.
그리하여 가난한 자는 그 제안을 받아들이고 곡식을 얻어 집으로 돌아갔지요.
부자가 앞을 내다봤던 건가요. 3일 후 그가 정말로 죽었기 때문이지요. 그것도 별안간 쓰러져 죽고 말았어요. 아무도 뭐가 어찌된 영문인지 모른 채였고, 또한 이 세상 그 누구도 그의 죽음을 슬퍼하지 않았죠.
부자 농장주가 땅에 묻힌 날, 가난한 농부는 자신이 한 약속이 떠올랐어요.
더는 생각 안하려했지만 마음을 고쳐먹었죠.
“무엇보다, 그는 내게 친절했어. 그가 준 곡식으로 내 자식들도 배를 채울 수 있었지. 굳이 그게 아니더라도 한 번 한 약속은 반드시 지켜야해.”
땅거미가 지면 그는 교회 부속의 묘지로 가 그 부자의 무덤 위에 걸터앉았지요.
모든 것이 조용했고, 떨어지는 달빛만 무덤 위로 여운을 남길 뿐이었어요.
종종 올빼미가 날아가며 울적한 울음소리를 남겼어요.
해가 뜨면, 가난한 농부는 조용히 자기 집으로 돌아왔지요. 그렇게 두 번째 밤까지 차분하게 지나갔어요.
문제는 세 번째 밤에 있었어요.
그 날은 유독 뭔가 불길한 일이 생길 것 같다는 느낌이 들었지요.
그가 도착해보니 교회 부속의 묘지 옆… 벽에 전에 못 보던 어떤 사나이의 모습이 드리워져 있었어요.
그 사나이는 더는 젊은 나이가 아니었고 또한 얼굴엔 상처들이 많았고 두 눈은 매섭고 예리하게 주변을 흩고 있었어요.
그 사나이는 또한 낡은 외토로 온 몸을 감싸고 있었는데 밖으로 보이는 거라곤 커다란 승마화(장화)가 다였지요.
“여기서 뭐 하요?”라며 농부가 말했어요. “묘지에 혼자 있다니 겁도 없소?”
“아무 것도 안 봤소,”라며 그가 말했어요. “두렵긴 개뿔! ‘무서움을 배우러 나선 젊은이 이야기’(그림형제 동화 링크 ▶ http://blog.naver.com/osy2201/220854588928 )를 못 들어보셨소, 그는 죽을 뻔 했지만 결국엔 공주를 아내로 얻고 막대한 재산도 챙겼지. 다만 난 빈털터리요, 지금은 기껏 해고당한 병사이고요, 오늘 밤 묵을 곳이 마땅찮아 여기서 보내려던 참이었소, 그 뿐이오.”
“원 그 사람 참 겁이 하나도 없구먼,”라며 농부가 말했어요. “그럼 나와 같이 있읍시다, 내가 저기 저 무덤을 지키는 걸 좀 도와주시오.” 
“지키는 거야 병사들의 본분(일)이죠,”라며 그가 대꾸했어요. “뭔 일이 닫치던, 그게 좋은 거든 나쁜 거든, 우리 함께 나눕시다그려.”
농부가 이에 동의했어요.
그들은 함께 그 무덤 위에 걸터앉았답니다.
밤 12시까진 모든 게 조용했어요.
그때 별안간 허공에서 서슬 푸른 휘파람 소리 한 번 들리더니, 두 파수꾼 앞에 악마 한 명이 떡하니 버티고 서 있었어요.
“꺼져, 이 건달들아!”라며 악마가 그들에게 소리쳤어요. “이 무덤에 누운 자는 내 거다. 내가 그를 데려가려하니, 너희들은 썩 물렀거라, 안 그럼 네 놈들 목부터 따주마!”
“붉은 깃털을 가진 아저씨야,”라며 병사가 말했어요. “네가 내 상관이라도 돼, 어디다 명령질이야, 난 여태껏 살면서 두려운 적이 없었어. 썩 꺼져, 우린 여기 계속 앉아 있을 테니까.”
악마가 속으로 생각했어요.
‘이 불량배들 둘을 떼어놓는 데는 돈 만한 게 없지.’
그래서 악마가 보다 부드러운 목소리로 친절 제안하기 시작했어요.
“돈을 좀 쥐어주면 집에 갈 텐가?”
“그 듣던 중 반가운 소리군,”라며 그 병사가 대답했어요. “하지만 금화 한 자루 가지고 우릴 놀릴 생각은 마. 내 장화 하나(발 하나) 속에 들어갈 만큼 많은 돈을 준다면 그땐 우리도 네 말에 굴복하고 자리를 떠주지.”
”지금은 그만한 돈이 없어,“라며 악마가 말했어요. “하지만 곧 가져오지. 이웃 마을에 내 절친(친한 친구)인 환전상(서로 다른 화폐를 바꿔주는 사람)이 살고 있거든, 그라면 내게 기꺼이 미리 내줄 거야.”
악마가 사라지자, 병사가 자신의 왼쪽 장화를 벗기더니 말했어요.
“‘숯꾼’(악마)의 코를 납작하게 만들게 당신 나이프(칼) 좀 줘 보시오, 친구.”
그가 장화의 바닥을 잘라내더니 키 큰 잔디에 올려놓았어요. 무덤 옆 구덩이에 수북히 자란 잔디가 있었거든요.
“이럼 됐다,”라며 그가 말했어요. “이제 ‘굴뚝 청소부’(악마)가 와도 돼.”
그들 둘은 그렇게 앉아 기다렸지요. 
머지않아 그 악마가 손에 작은 금화 주머니를 들고서 돌아왔어요.
“이 안에 부어보쇼,”라며 병사가 자신의 장화를 살짝 들어올리며 말했어요. “다 차지도 않을 거요.”
검은 자(악마)가 주머니를 마구 흔들며 금화를 쏟아 부었는데도 그 장화는 여전히 비워 있었지요.
“어리석은 악마,”라며 병사가 말했어요. “내 그런다고 했잖아! 또 말해? 얼른 가서 더 가져와.”
악마가 고개를 흔들며 가더니 한 시간 만에 훨씬 더 큰 돈 가방을 품에 안고 돌아왔어요.
“이제 부어보쇼,”라며 병사가 외쳤어요. “하지만 내 장담하건데 그래도 다 안 찰 걸.”
금화가 찰랑거리며 마구 솟아졌지만 그래도 그 장화는 텅 비었어요.
악마가 두 눈을 이글거리며 빤히 쳐다보더니 확신에 차 말했어요.
“아무래도 내 놈 다리가 큰 송아지만한 모양이군!”라며 악마가 소리치더니 얼굴을 온통 찌푸렸어요.
“그럼 내가,”라며 병사가 대꾸했어요. “너처럼 갈라진 발굽을 가진 줄 알았냐? 왜 그리 인색한 거야? 얼른 가서 더 많은 금화를 가지고 오라고, 안 그럼 우리 거래는 없던 거야!”
사악한 자(악마)가 다시 출발했어요.
이번엔 악마가 한 참 동안 돌아오지 않았어요. 그러다 마침내 악마가 어깨에 엄청 무거운 짐을 지고 낑낑거리며 나타났어요.
악마가 그걸 다 장화 속에 솟아 부었지만 여전히 장화가 가득차려면 멀었지요.
그러자 열불이 난 악마가 그 병사의 손에서 그 장화를 낚아채 막 찢어버리려는데, 때마침 새벽을 알리는 아침 빛줄기가 하늘에서부터 날아와 닿는 바람에 악한 영혼(악마)이 커다란 비명소리를 지르며 사라져버렸어요.
그리하여 불쌍한 영혼(부자 농장주)이 구원받을 수 있었지요.
농부가 그 금화들을 반반씩 나누려하자, 병사가 말했어요.
“내 몫은 가난한 사람들에게 주시오, 나는 당신과 함께 당신 집으로 가 살겠소. 그러니 남은 걸로 우리 여생을 평화롭게 지냅시다, 하느님께서 허락해주시는 한 말이오.”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「무덤」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「무덤」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter195.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



196. 늙은 링크랑크



딸 하나를 둔 왕이 있었어요.
그래서 왕은 유리산을 만들게 해 누구든 이 산에서 떨어지지 않고 반대편까지 가는 사람에게 자신의 딸을 아내로 주겠다고 말했어요.
그때 공주님을 흠모하던 자가 있었는데, 그가 나서며 자신이 한 번 해봐도 되겠느냐고 물었어요.
“그래,”라며 왕이 말했어요. “떨어지지 않고 산만 넘는다면 그 애를 주마.”
그러자 공주님도 그와 함께 가겠다고 말했어요. 그가 미끄러지지 않도록 꼭 잡아주겠다면서요.
그리하여 그들이 산을 넘으려 함께 출발했죠.
반쯤 넘었을 때 공주님이 그만 미끄러져 떨어지고 말았는데 순간 유리산이 열리며 그녀를 덥석 삼키곤 닫혀버렸어요. 
그래서 그녀의 약혼자는 그녀가 어디로 사라졌는지 알 길이 없었지요. 왜냐면 산이 너무도 순식간에 닫혀버렸거든요.
그는 울며 너무도 상심했어요.
왕도 비참하긴 마찬가지였어요. 그래서 산을 부수고 그녀가 어디로 갔는지 찾게 했어요. 그러면 그녀를 다시 찾을 수 있을 것만 같았거든요. 하지만 아무도 그녀가 떨어진 곳을 찾을 수 없었어요.
한편 공주님은 땅속에 있던 깊고 깊은 동굴 속으로 깊숙이 떨어지고 말았어요.
아주 기다란 회색 수염을 한 늙은이가 나와 그녀를 마중하며 이제부터 그녀는 자신의 하녀가 되어 시키는 대로 해야 한다고 말했어요. 그럼 살려주겠지만, 그러지 않음 죽이겠다고 그가 말했어요.
그래서 그녀는 그가 시키는 모든 걸 했어요.
아침이면 그는 자신의 호주머니 속에서 사다리를 꺼내 산을 향해 놓곤 꼭대기까지 올라갔지요. 그런 다음이면 어김없이 사다리를 들어 올려 버렸어요.
공주는 그의 식사를 준비해야했고요, 침대를 정돈해야했고요, 그의 일을 다 했어요. 
그리고 돌아올 때면 그는 항상 금화와 은화를 수북이 가지고 왔어요.
수년을 그와 함께 살다보니 그녀도 나이를 아주 들게 되었답니다. 
그러자 그가 그녀를 ‘만스로트 아줌마’라고 불렀어요. 그리고 그녀도 그를 ‘늙은’(‘추악한’이란 의미가 더 강함) ‘링크랑크’라고 불렀지요.
한번은 그가 외출했을 때, 그녀는 그의 침대를 정돈하고 설거지를 하곤 문과 창문을 모두 단단히 닫고는, 빛이 들어오는 작은 창문 하나만 열어놓았어요.
늙은 링크랑크가 집에 와 문을 노크하며 소리쳤어요.
“만스로트 아줌마, 문 열어.”
“아니요,”라며 그녀가 말했어요. “늙은 링크랑크, 전 당신에게 문을 열어주지 않을 거예요.”
그러자 그가 말했어요.
“불쌍한 링크랑크, 나 여기 서 있네, 열일곱 길이의 다리로, 지치고 피곤한 발로, 내 접시들을 닦아야지, 만스로트 아줌마.”
“당신 접시들은 이미 다 닦았어요.”라며 그녀가 말했어요.
그러자 그가 다시 말했어요.
“불쌍한 링크랑크, 나 여기 서 있네, 열일곱 길이의 다리로, 지치고 피곤한 발로, 내 침대를 정돈해야지, 만스로트 아줌마.”
“당신 침대 벌써 다 정돈했어요.”라며 그녀가 말했어요.
그러자 그가 다시 말했어요.
“불쌍한 링크랑크, 나 여기 서 있네, 열일곱 길이의 다리로, 지치고 피곤한 발로, 문 열어, 만스로트 아줌마.”
그런 다음 그가 자기 집을 사방으로 살폈는데 마침 작은 창문 하나가 열러 있는 게 눈에 들어왔어요.
그가 생각했어요.
‘그녀가 무얼 하기에 이렇게 문을 안 열어주려는 건지 내가 좀 들여다봐야겠다.“
그가 안을 엿보려고 하는데 고개를 창에 집어넣을 수가 없었어요. 수염이 너무 길었기 때문이죠.
그래서 그가 턱수염을 먼저 열린 창문을 통해 집어넣었는데, 그가 수염을 다 집어넣자마자, 만스로트 아줌마가 냉큼 오더니 창문 줄을 아래로 당겨버렸어요. 그녀가 미리 묶어놓았던 줄이었지요. 그래서 그의 턱수염이 창문 틈에 단단히 끼이고 말았어요.
그러자 그가 몹시도 슬프게 울기 시작했어요. 왜냐면 너무도 아팠던 거지요, 그래서 그가 그녀보고 제발 좀 풀어달라며 간청했어요.
하지만 그녀는, 그가 산에 오를 때 사용하는 그 사다리를 내어줄 때까지는 못 놓아주겠다고 말했어요.
그래서 주고 싶던 안주고 싶던 그는 그 사다리가 있는 위치를 그녀에게 말해주어야 했지요.
그리고 그녀는 그 창문에 아주 긴 리본을 매단 다음 사다리를 벽에다 대고 산으로 올라갔어요. 산꼭대기에 닿았을 때 그녀가 창문을 열어주었어요.
그녀는 아빠에게로 가 그동안 있었던 모든 걸 말씀드렸지요.
왕이 크게 기뻐했어요, 그리고 그녀의 약혼자도 아직 거기 있었고요.
사람들이 와 그 산을 파 뒤집어 안에 있던 늙은 링크랑크와 그의 모든 금화와 은화들을 찾아냈어요.
그런 다음 왕은 늙은 링크랑크를 처형시키고 그의 모든 금화와 은화를 몰수했어요.
공주님은 자신의 약혼자와 결혼해, 위엄 있고 기쁘도록 행복하게도 잘 살았다네요.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「늙은 링크랑크」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「늙은 링크랑크」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter196.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



197. 수정 구슬



옛날에 여자마법사가 살고 있었어요. 그녀에겐 서로 끔찍이도 사랑하는 세 아들이 있었어요. 하지만 노파는 아들들을 신뢰하지 않았죠. 급기야 그들이 자신의 힘을 훔치고 싶어한다는 생각까지 하게 되었답니다.
그래서 그녀는 첫째 아들을 독수리로 변신시키고 바위투성이 산에서 살게 했답니다. 그래서 독수리는 하늘에서 종종 큰 원들을 그리며 바람을 가르는 모습이 목격되었답니다.
그녀는 둘째 아들을 깊은 바다에 사는 고래로 바꾸었어요. 그래서 고래가 물 밖으로 몸을 내밀고 큰 물줄기를 내뿜는 모습이 종종 목격되었지요.
이 두 사람은 하루에 2시간 동안만 인간의 모습으로 돌아왔어요.
셋째인 막내는 그녀가 자신을 곰이나 늑대와 같은 야수로 변신시킬까봐 겁이나 몰래 집을 빠져나갔어요.
그는 마법에 걸린 공주님이 있다는 소문과 황금 태양을 머금은 성에 그녀가 감금되어 마법에서 풀릴 날만 기다리고 있단 소문을 들었답니다.
하지만 그간 공주님을 구하려던 23명의 젊은이들이 이미 비참한 죽음을 맞이한 이후였죠. 그리되니 이후 추가적인 시도도 없을뿐더러 찾아오는 사람도 없었다고 해요.
그는 원래 두려움을 모르는 사내라 자신이 황금 태양을 머금은 성에서 그녀를 구할 생각에 사로잡혔죠.
그래서 오랫동안 세상을 여행 다녔지만 도무지 그 성이 어디 있는지 나오지가 않는 거예요.
그러다 우연히 울창한 숲에 들어가게 되었는데 이젠 빠져나갈 길도 못 찾고 있었죠.
그와 동시에 저 멀리서 두 거인이 그를 향해 손을 흔들며 와 달라고 신호를 보내고 있는 게 보였어요.
그들이 말했어요.
“우린 지금 모자 하나를 놓고 싸우는 중이야. 이 모자가 누구 건지 말이야. 우린 힘이 똑같지, 서로 상대방보다 더 세지 않아. 작은 인간들이 우리 거인들보다 똑똑하다 들었어. 네가 결정 좀 내려주라.”
“그깟 낡은 모자 때문에 다투신다는 건가요?”라며 젊은이가 말했어요.
“그게 그렇지가 않아! 그건 소망이 성취되는 모자야. 누구든 이 모자를 쓰면 자신이 바라는 어디든 갈 수 있단다, 소원하는 즉시 거기에 가 있지.”
“제게 그 모자를 줘 보세요.”라며 젊은이가 말했어요. “제가 멀리 가서 당신들을 부를 테니 달리기 시합들을 하세요. 먼저 제게 도착하는 사람이 이 모자를 가지게 해요.”
그는 모자를 쓴 다음 길을 떠났어요. 하지만 원체 공주님 생각뿐이었기에 거인들을 깜빡하고서 계속 앞으로만 걸었죠.
결국 그가 긴 한숨을 내쉬며 탄식했어요.
“아, 황금 태양을 머금은 성이나 나왔으면.”
그 말이 입술에서 나오자마자 그는 높은 산 위에 있는 그 성의 성문 앞에 서 있었어요.
그는 들어가 온 방을 지나 마침내 공주님을 찾을 수 있었답니다.
하지만 공주를 보자마자 큰 충격을 먹고 말았죠.
아 글쎄 공주님이 얼굴에 주름이 자글자글하고 흐리멍덩한 눈을 하고 빨간 머리카락을 지닌 백발 노파지 뭐예요.
“당신이 공주님이세요, 세상에서 가장 아름답다고 모두가 칭송하는 그 공주님 말이에요?”라며 그가 탄식하며 말했어요.
“아,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “이건 제 원래 모습이 아니에요. 인간의 눈에만 제가 지금 추하게 보일 뿐이에요. 제 본래 모습을 보시려면 거울에 비친 저를 보셔야 해요. 그럼 제 진짜 모습을 보실 수 있으세요.”
그녀가 그의 손에 거울을 쥐어주자, 그가 들여다보았어요.
거울 속엔 정말로 지구상에서 가장 아름다운 여인이 두 뺨에 슬픔 가득 눈물방울을 떨구고 있었어요.
그런 다음 그가 말했어요.
“제가 어떻게 하면 당신을 구할 수 있나요? 전 두렵지 않아요.”
그녀가 말했어요.
“수정 구슬을 구해 마법사의 눈앞에 보이시면 제 모든 마법이 풀려 본래 모습을 되찾을 수가 있어요. 아,”라며 그녀가 덧붙였어요. “하지만 수많이 사람들이 그것을 시도하다 죽음을 맞이하고 말았죠. 당신은 너무 젊으신데. 이런 큰 위험과 마주할 걸 생각하니 전 너무 슬퍼요.”
“나를 막을 건 아무 것도 없어요.”라며 그가 말했어요. “내 그 일을 꼭 해내겠습니다.”
“아셔야할 게 있으세요.”라며 공주님이 말했어요. “당신이 성이 서 있는 이 산을 내려가면, 사나운 황소가 불쑥 튀어나와 싸움을 걸어올 건데, 당신은 그 황소와 싸워야 해요. 그리고 다행히 그 황소를 죽이시면, 불새가 황소의 시체에서 튀어 나올 텐데, 그 불새의 몸 속엔 불타는 알이 하나 있는데, 그 알 속에 수정 구슬이 마치 ‘계란의 노른자위’처럼 들어 있답니다. 하지만 불새가 알을 내려놓지 않고 잘못해 불새 자체가 땅에 떨어지면 모든 게 화염에 휩싸이고 가까이 있는 모든 게 수정 구슬과 함께 녹아버리고 말아요. 그럼 모든 게 헛수고가 되요.”
젊은이가 산 아래로 내려가 보니 정말로 황소가 코를 불며 거칠게 숨 쉬면서 그를 향해 으르렁거렸어요.
한참을 싸운 후 그가 가까스로 동물의 몸에 검을 꼽을 수 있었답니다.
황소가 쓰러지자마자 즉시 불새가 그 속에서 튀어나와 막 날아가려했지요.
하지만 바로 그때 젊은이의 첫째 형인 독수리가 구름 사이를 헤치고 내려와 불새를 바다로 몰고 가, 부리(독수리의 입)로 불새의 다리를 쪼아 알이 떨어지게 했어요.
하지만 그 알은 바다로 떨어지지 않고 해안가에 서 있던 어부의 오두막 위로 떨어지는 바람에 순식간에 오두막에서 연기가 자욱해지더니 막 불이 붙어 무너지러하고 있었어요.
바로 그때 바다에서 집채만큼 높은 파도가 솟구치더니 그 오두막을 향해 물줄기를 내뿜기 시작해 불기운을 죽였어요.
그건 또 다른 형인 고래였지요. 고래는 해안가로 물을 밀고 와 높은 파도를 오두막에 던졌어요.
불이 완전히 꺼지고, 젊은이가 알을 찾아보니 다행히 녹지 않고 온전한 모습이었어요.
하지만 불에 달구워졌다가 물에 급급히 식는 과정에 알껍데기가 깨져버려, 그가 상처입지 않은 수정 구슬을 꺼낼 수 있었답니다. 
젊은이는 마법사에게 가 그의 눈앞에 수정 구슬을 보여주었지요.
마법사(젊은이의 어머니가 아님. 디란 마법사임)가 말하길,
“내 마법은 풀렸다. 이제부턴 네가 황금 태양을 머금은 성의 왕이다. 그와 더불어 네 형들도 본래 인간의 모습으로 돌아올 것이다.”
그런 다음 젊은이가 서둘러 공주에게 갔지요.
그가 방에 들어섰을 때, 공주님은 화사한 꽃처럼 아름다움을 머금은 채 거기 서 있었답니다.
그들은 기뻐하며 서로 반지를 교환했데요.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「수정 구슬」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「수정 구슬」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter197.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



198. 말렌 아가씨



강대국 왕의 딸에게 구혼(결혼을 청함)한 외동아들을 둔 어떤 왕(약소국)이 옛날에 살고 있었어요.
청혼을 받은 공주의 이름은 말렌 아가씨로, 무척이나 아름다운 여인이었답니다.
그녀의 아빠(강대국)는 딸애를 다른 이에게 주고 싶어, 왕자(약소국)의 구혼을 거절하였어요. 하지만 둘은 이미 진심으로 서로 사랑하였기에, 떨어지지 않으려했어요, 그래서 말렌 아가씨는 아빠(강대국)에게 말했지요.
“그이 아니면 누구도 제 남편으로 섬기지 않겠어요.”
그리되니 왕도 벌컥 화가 나서 깜깜한 탐을 짓게 해 해도 달도 빛줄기 하나 들지 못하게 만들었어요. 탑이 완공되자 왕이 말했어요.
“널 저 안에 7년 동안 가두겠다, 그러고 나서도 네 외고집이 꺾이지 않는지 보자구나.”
7년 동안 먹을 고기와 음료수가 그 탑 안으로 운반되고 난 후, 그녀와 그녀의 시녀가 거기 도착해 계단을 올라갔지요. 그런 다음 문이 갇히고 그녀들은 하늘과 땅으로부터 완전히 차단되었답니다.
거긴 어둠만이 있을 뿐이었어요, 곧 밖이 밤인지 낮인지조차도 분간이 가질 않기 시작했죠.
왕자(약소국)가 종종 와서 탑 주변을 돌며 그녀들의 이름을 소리쳐 불러보았지만 두꺼운 벽들에 막혀 어떤 소리도 안으로 들어가지 못했답니다.
이리되니 그들이 할 수 있는 일이라곤 그저 한탄하고 탄식해하는 일 뿐이었지 않겠어요?
한편 그러는 동안에도 세월은 흐르고 흘러 음식 비축량이 서서히 줄어드는 것을 통해 그녀들도 곧 7년의 기간이 끝나가고 있음을 감지하게 되었죠.
곧 풀려나리라 확신하고 있는데, 그런데 아무리 기다려도 해머질 소리가 들려오지도, 그렇다고 벽돌담이 무너지는 소리도 들리지 않는 거예요, 네, 맞아요, 아무래도 말렌 아가씨의 아버님께서 딸을 잊으신 것만 같았어요.
음식이 거의 다 떨어지고 이제 기다리는 건 비참한 죽음뿐인지라, 말렌 아가씨가 말했어요.
“마지막 기회야, 우리가 저 벽을 뚫을 수 있는지 보자.”
그녀가 톱날식의 빵 칼을 꺼내 돌 사이의 모르타르(시멘트. 끍으면 끍힘)를 쪼아 구멍을 파기 시작했어요.
그녀가 지치면 시녀가 이어받아 계속했지요.
엄청난 노력 끝에 돌 하나를 빼는데 성공했어요. 두 번째, 세 번째 돌도 뺄 수 있었지요, 그리고 며칠 후 그녀들이 있는 어둠 속으로 첫 번째 빛줄기가 새어 들어오더니 마침내는 밖을 내다볼 수 있을 정도로 구멍이 커졌답니다.  
하늘은 푸르고, 선선한 산들바람이 어찌나 그녀들의 얼굴을 가지고 놀던지요. 하지만 밖의 전경은 한 마디로 비참함 그 자체였어요!
아빠의 성은 황폐화되어 있었고, 도시며 마을들은 눈에 보이는 저 끝까지 완전히 불에 타 파괴되어 있었지요. 또한 광대하던 밭들이 버려진 채였고요, 사람의 모습은 아예 보이지도 않았어요.
벽의 열린 틈이 이제 그녀들이 빠져나갈 만큼 커졌어요, 시녀가 먼저 아래로 뛰어내렸고요, 다음으로 말렌 아가씨가 따라서 뛰어내렸지요.
하지만 이젠 어디로 가죠?
적들이 이미 온 왕국을 황폐화시키고 왕을 내쫓고 거주민들을 모두 죽인 이후였는데요.
그녀들은 헤매다 다른 나라를 찾아가게 되었어요. 하지만 어디에도 안식처는 없었죠, 빵 한 조각 주려는 사람도 없었는 걸요, 그래서 그녀들은 쐐기풀(높이 40~80센티미터 정도의 풀)로 허기를 달래야했어요.
한참을 여행한 후에야 그들은 다른 나라에 도착했어요. 그녀들은 먼저 일자리를 찾아보았답니다. 하지만 노크를 하는 족족 쫓겨났지요, 아무도 그들을 동정하지 않았어요.
그러다 마침내 큰 도시에 도착해 궁전에 갔지요.
그들도 그녀들보고 가라고 명령했어요. 하지만 결국 요리사가 그녀들을 부엌에 머물게 해주어 부엌 허드레꾼 일을 하게 되었지요.
하지만 그 왕국의 왕자님은 바로 말렌 아가씨에게 구혼을 했던 바로 그 남자였어요.
하지만 지금은 왕이 자기 아들을 위해 다른 신부를 선택한 이후였지요. 그 신부는 자신의 사악한 마음씨만큼이나 추한 얼굴의 소유자였어요.
결혼식 날짜도 정해졌고요, 신부는 벌써 도착해 있었죠. 하지만 자기가 생각해도 자신이 너무도 추했기에 그녀는 방에 꽁꽁 처박혀서는 누구도 자신의 얼굴을 보는 걸 허락하지 않았어요, 다만 말렌 아가씨만이 부엌에서 식사를 날라다주었지요.
그러다 신부가 신랑과 교회에 갈 날이 다가오자, 신부는 못생긴 게 너무 수치스러워 거리 사람들 앞에 나서는 게 두려웠어요. 사람들이 놀리고 비웃을 수 있었기 때문이지요.
그때 신부가 말렌 아가씨보고 말했어요.
“큰 영광인줄 알거라. 내가 발을 삐어 밖에 나갈 수가 없다. 그러니 네가 내 신부복을 입고 나인 척을 하거라. 평생 이보다 더한 영광이 어딨겠니, 특히나 너한테 말이다!”
하지만 말렌 아가씨는 단호히 거절하며 말했어요.
“제 복에 겨운 행복은 저도 바라지 않아요.”
하지만 허사였죠. 
신부가 곧 금을 주겠다 제안했거든요.
결국 다 실패하자 신부가 화를 내며 말했어요.
“내 말대로 하지 않겠다면, 널 죽이라 명하겠다. 거역하는 말을 한 마디만 더하면, 네 머리가 발에 떨어져 있을 줄 알거라.”
그리하여 말렌 아가씨가 명령을 따를 수 밖에 없었어요. 그녀가 신부의 훌륭한 신부복을 입고 보석들을 착용했지요.
그녀가 궁전 홀로 들어서니, 모두가 그녀의 미모에 감탄해마지 않았어요. 
그때 왕이 아들보고 말했어요.
“어떠냐, 이 신부가 내가 너를 위해 선택한 바로 그 신부란다. 자 함께 교회로 가려무나.”
신랑도 깜짝 놀라하며 생각했어요.
‘정말 말렌 아가씨를 닮았구나, 정말 그녀라 해도 믿겠어, 하지만 그녀는 탑에 갇혀 오래전에 죽었을 테지.’
그가 그녀의 손을 잡고 교회로 향했어요.
가는 도중 쐐기풀이 있자, 그녀가 말했어요.
“아, 쐐기풀아, 귀여운 쐐기풀아, 여기 혼자 있구나? 그땐, 널 끓이지도, 굽지도 않고, 그냥 먹었었지.”
“뭐라 말하셨소?”라며 왕자님이 물었어요.
“아무것도요,”라며 말렌 아가씨가 대꾸했어요. “막 말렌 아가씨 생각이 나서요.”
그녀가 말렌 아가씨를 안다는 말에 왕자님은 깜짝 놀랐지만 아무 말도 하지 않았어요.
그들이 다리 앞에 도착했을 때, 그녀가 말했어요.
“다리야, 부서지지 마렴, 난 진짜 신부가 아니란다.”
“저기다 뭐라 하신 거요?”라며 왕자님이 물었어요.
“아무것도요,”라며 그녀가 대꾸했어요. “그냥 막 말렌 아가씨 생각이 나서요.”
“당신은 말렌 아기씨를 아시오?”
“아니오,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “제가 어찌 그녀를 알겠어요. 소문을 들었을 뿐이에요.”
그들이 교회 문에 다다르자 그녀가 한 번 더 말했어요.
“교회문아, 부서지지 마렴, 난 진짜 신부가 아니란다.”
“지금 뭐라신 게요?”라며 그가 물었어요.
“아,”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “그냥 막 말렌 아가씨 생각이 나서요.”
그때 왕자님이 보석 목걸이를 꺼내 그녀의 목에 걸어주고 버클(잠그는 거)을 잠가주었어요.
그후 즉시 그들은 교회로 들어갔고, 목사님이 제단 앞에서 그들의 손을 맞잡게 하셨고 그들은 결혼을 하게 되었답니다.
왕자님이 그녀를 집으로 데려다줄 동안 그녀는 단 한 마디도 하지 않았어요.
그들이 궁전에 도착하자, 그녀는 서둘러 신부 방으로 들어가, 훌륭한 신부복과 보석들을 벗고, 자신의 추리한 옷으로 갈아입었어요. 다만 신랑한테서 받은 목걸이만은 계속 차고 있었죠.
밤이 되자, 신부가 왕자님의 침실로 안내되어 왔어요. 그녀는 왕자님이 못 보게 자신의 얼굴을 면사포로 가린 상태였죠.
모두가 물려나고 나자, 왕자님이 그녀에게 말했어요.
“그래 길가에 자라고 있던 그 쐐기풀들에겐 뭐라 말하신 게요?”
“쐐기풀이라니요?”라며 그녀가 물었어요. “전 쐐기풀에게 말을 걸지 않는데요.”
“그렇담, 당신은 진짜 신부가 아니오.”라며 왕자님이 말했어요.
그래서 그녀가 문득 든 생각이 있어 말했어요.
“제 시녀에게 가보고 올게요. 그 애라면 제가 말한 걸 모두 기억하거든요.”
밖으로 나온 그녀가 말렌 아가씨를 찾았어요.
“이것아, 그래 쐐기풀에겐 뭐라 한 거냐?”
(큰따옴표 시작→) “아무 말도 안 했어요. 그냥 이렇게만 말했어요, 
‘아, 쐐기풀아, 귀여운 쐐기풀아, 여기 혼자 있구나? 그땐, 널 끓이지도, 굽지도 않고, 그냥 먹었었지.’” (←큰따옴표 끝)
신부가 침실로 돌아와 말했어요.
“이제야 쐐기풀에게 했던 말이 생각나네요.”
그러면서 그녀는 들은 걸 그대로 되풀이해 말해주었답니다.
“하지만 다리 건널 때 한 얘기는 또 뭐요?”라며 왕자님이 물었어요.
“다리, 뭐요?”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “전 다리에게 말을 걸지 않아요.”
“그렇담 당신은 진짜 신부가 아니오.”
그녀가 다시 말했어요.
“제 시녀에게 가보고 올게요. 그 애라면 제가 말한 걸 모두 기억하거든요.”
밖으로 뛰쳐나온 그녀가 말렌 아가씨를 찾았어요.
“이것아, 그래 다리에겐 또 뭐라 한 게냐?”
(큰따옴표 시작→) “아무 말도 안 했어요. 그냥 이렇게만 말했어요, 
‘다리야, 부서지지 마렴, 난 진짜 신부가 아니란다.’” (←큰따옴표 끝)
“죽을 줄 알거라!”라며 신부가 소리쳤어요. 하지만 허둥지둥 방으로 돌아와 말했지요.
“이제야 다리에게 했던 말이 생각나네요.”
그러면서 그녀는 들은 걸 그대로 되풀이해 말해주었답니다.
“하지만 교회 문에서 한 얘기는 또 뭐요?”라며 왕자님이 물었어요.
“교회 문에서요?”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “전 교회 문에게 말을 걸지 않아요.”
“그렇담 당신은 진짜 신부가 아니오.”
밖으로 나온 그녀가 말렌 아가씨를 찾았어요.
“이것아, 그래 교회 문에겐 또 뭐라 한 게냐?”
(큰따옴표 시작→) “아무 말도 안 했어요. 그냥 이렇게만 말했어요, 
‘교회문아, 부서지지 마렴, 난 진짜 신부가 아니란다.’” (←큰따옴표 끝)
“정말 네 목이 달아나야 정신을 차리겠구나!”라며 신부가 꽥 소리를 질렀어요. 정말 발끈한 거죠.
하지만 그녀는 허둥지둥 방으로 돌아와 말했지요.
“이제야 교회 문에게 했던 말이 생각나네요.”
그러면서 그녀는 들은 걸 그대로 되풀이해 말해주었답니다.
“하지만 교회 문에서 내가 당신에게 준 보석은 어쩌신 게요?”
“무슨 보석요?”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “당신이 제게 언제 보석을 줬다는 거예요.”
“내가 직접 당신 목에 둘러주지 않았소, 버클을 잠가주기까진 한 걸. 그걸 모르고 있다면, 그렇담 당신은 내 진짜 신부가 아니오.”
그가 그녀의 얼굴을 가리고 있던 면사포를 잡아당겼더니 그녀의 몹시도 추한 얼굴이 그대로 드러났어요, 그 바람에 화들짝 놀란 왕자가 뒤로 나가떨어지며 말했어요.
“여기 어떻게 온 게요? 당신 대체 누구요?”
“전 당신과 약혼한 신부예요, 하지만 사람들 앞에 나서면 조롱을 받을까봐 두려워 ‘설거지만 맡는 가정부’를 제 대신 옷을 입혀 교회로 보냈던 거예요.”
“그렇담 그녀는 대체 어디 있소?”라며 그가 말했어요. “그녀를 우선 보고 싶소, 이리로 불러주시오.”
그녀는 밖으로 나가더니 하인들에게 “‘설거지만 맡는 그 가정부’가 실은 사기꾼이니 즉시 마당으로 끌어내 목을 쳐라(죽이라)”고 말했어요.
하인들이 말렌 아가씨를 붙잡고 끌고 나가려하자, 그녀가 도움을 청하는 비명을 질렀고, 왕자님이 그녀의 다급한 목소리를 듣고 방에서 나와 그들에게 “즉시 그 아가씨를 풀어주거라”라고 명령했어요.
불을 가져오게 해, 왕자님은 자신이 교회 문에서 그녀에게 주었던 황금 목걸이가 그녀의 목에 둘러있는 걸 확인하였지요.
“당신이 나와 함께 교회에 갔던,”라며 그가 말했어요. “내 진짜 신부요. 자 나와 함께 내 방으로 가십시다.”
그들 둘만 침실에 남았을 때, 왕자님이 말했어요.
“교회에 가는 도중 당신 입에서 말렌 아가씨란 말이 나왔을 때, 난 내 귀를 의심했었소, 말렌 아가씨는 내가 예전에 내가 약혼한 신부요. 그런데 지금 당신을 다시 보니 모든 면에서 당신은 그녀를 너무도 닮았구려.”
그녀가 대답했어요.
“제가 바로 그 말렌 아가씨에요, 당신과의 약속을 지키려다 어둠 속에 7년 동안이나 갇혀 배고픔과 목마름으로 고통 받은 여인이요, 그리고도 한동안을 가난과 결핍 속에 살아야했지요. 하지만 오늘 해살이 찬란한 가운데 당신과 교회로 가 결혼식을 올렸으니 전 이제 당신의 합법적인 아내랍니다.”
그들은 서로 키스를 하고, 평생 행복하게 살았답니다.
물론 가짜 신부는 응벌을 받아 목이 달아나는 처벌을 받았지요.
말렌 아가씨가 갇혀 있었던 그 탑은 오랫동안 계속 그 자리에 서 있었는데요, 아이들이 그 탑 옆을 지날 때면 다음과 같은 노래를 불렀다네요.
“딸랑, 딸랑, 찬양송. 탑에 누가 갇혀있나? 공주님이 안에 계시 다네. 그녀는 이미 보이지 않는데, 벽도 멀쩡하고, 돌도 뚫을 수 없네. 코트 빼 입은 꼬마 ‘한스’(독일사람이란 뜻임)야, 그러니 얼른, 얼른, 따라오려무나.” 
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「말렌 아가씨」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「말렌 아가씨」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter198.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



199. 물소 가죽 장화



겁이 하나도 없어 고민거리가 하나도 없던 병사가 있었어요.
그러다 제대(전역)를 했는데, 어쩌죠?, 배운 게 하나도 없어 직업을 가질 수도 그렇다고 장사를 할 밑천도 없지 뭐예요.
그리하여 상냥한 사람들에게 구걸을 하며 이리저리 돌아다니게 되었죠.
그가 가진 거라곤 낡은 방수복이랑, 물소 가죽으로 만든 승마화가 다였어요.
어느 날 그가 어딘지도 모르는 곳을 걸어가고 있는데 탁 트인 들판이 나오기에 쭉 걷다 결국 숲에 들어가게 되었지요.
어딘지 몰라 하고 있는데, 그의 눈에, 자르고 납은 나무 밑동 위에 초록색 ‘수렵복’(숲에서 총 쏠 때 입는 옷. 사냥복)을 그러니까 전체적으로 옷을 잘 빼어 입은 어느 사나이가 앉아 있는 게 보이지 않겠어요.
병사는 그 사나이와 악수를 나눈 다음 그의 옆에 있는 잔디에 앉아 두 다리를 쭉 폈어요.
“자네 검정색 장화 멋지군.”라며 그가 사냥꾼에게 말했어요. “하지만 나처럼 오래 여행할 거라면 그런 장화는 권하지 않겠네. 내 걸 보게, 이건 물소 가죽으로 만들 거라네, 오랫동안 신었지만 여전히 물불 가리지 않고 잘 걷는다네.”
잠시 후 병사가 일어나며 말했어요.
“더는 못 머물겠군, 배가 고파 더 걸어가 봐야겠어. 근데 멋진 장화를 신은 형씨, 이리로 가면 어디가 나오오?”
“나도 모른다네,”라며 그 사냥꾼이 대답했어요. “나도 숲에서 길을 잃었거든.”
“그거 참 인연이네 그래,”라며 병사가 말했어요. “끼리끼리 모인다고, 우리 함께 붙어다니며 길을 찾아보세나.”
그 사냥꾼이 싱끗 웃어보였어요.
그리하여 그들이 좀 더 좀 더 걷다보니 어느새 밤이 되었답니다.
“숲이 너무 깊어,”라며 병사가 말했어요. “다행히 저 멀리 불빛이 반짝이는군, 먹을 걸 좀 얻을 수 있나 저리로 가보세.”
그건 돌로 지은 집이었어요.
그가 문을 노크하니 노파 한 명이 문을 열었어요.
“저희는 이 밤에 묵을 곳을 찾고 있습니다.”라며 병사가 말했어요. “게다가 뱃가죽이 달라붙어서 텅 빈 배낭 같거든요.”
“여기 오면 안 돼,”라며 노파가 대답했어요. “여긴 산적들의 소굴이야. 그들이 오기 전에 가지 않음 목숨을 잃게 된다고.”
“나쁠 것도 없잖아요,”라며 병사가 대답했어요. “이틀 동안 한 입도 못 먹었어요, 여기서 죽어나 숲에서 굶어죽으나 그게 그거지. 들어갈래요.”
사냥꾼이 따라 들어가려하지 않자, 병사가 그의 소매를 끌며 말했어요.
“형씨, 꾸물거리지 말고 들어와, 죽기밖에 더 하겠어!”
노파는 그들에게 동정심을 느끼고 말했어요.
“그럼 저기 난로 뒤에 숨어 있어슈, 그들이 밥을 먹고 나면 자러 갈 테니, 그때 내 당신들게 남은 음식을 챙겨드리리다.”  
그들이 구석에 웅크리고 앉자마자 열두 산적들이 우당탕 밀고 들어와 음식이 차려져 있는 식탁에 앉아 미친 듯 음식을 가져오라 아우성쳤어요.
노파가 구운 고기를 몇 접시에 가득 담아내오니 산적들은 먹는 데 정신이 온통 팔려 있었어요.
음식 냄새가 솟아올라 병사의 콧구멍 속으로 쏙 들어왔지요.
그가 사냥꾼에게 말했어요.
“제기랄, 더는 배가 고파서 못 참겠네, 나도 저기 식탁에 앉아 저들과 같이 먹겠네.”
“우리 둘 다 죽이고 싶어서 그래.”라며 사냥꾼이 말하며 뒤에서 병사의 팔을 붙들었어요.
하지만 병사는 일부러 기침을 콜록콜록 하기 시작했지요.
그 바람에 산적들이 들고 있던 나이프(칼)와 포크를 내동댕이치고서 벌떡 일어났고, 난로 뒤에 있던 두 사람은 곧 발각되고 말았죠.
“어이, 신사양반들, 그 구석에서 무얼 하시나?”라며 그들이 소리쳤어요. “여기서 뭘 하고 있었지? 스파이(첩자) 아냐? 잠시 기다려봐, 내 곧 너희들을 목 매달아줄 테니까.”
“말 좀 작작 좀 하지,”라며 병사가 말했어요. “일단 내가 지금 배가 너무 고파 죽을 판이니 뭐 좀 먹고 얘기하지, 그럼 다음 날 구워 삼든지 말든지 하라고.”
산적들이 깜짝 놀랐어요.
두목이 말했지요.
“완전히 간땡이가 부은 놈이군. 어디, 음식을 줘봐. 하지만 다 먹고 나면 죽을 줄 알라고.”
“그럼 어디.”라며 병사가 말하더니 식탁에 앉아 구운 고기를 씩씩하게 먹어대기 시작했어요. 
“어이 멋진 장화 형씨, 형씨도 어서 와 먹으라고.”라며 그가 사냥꾼을 소리쳐 불렀어요. “형씨도 나만큼 배고프잖아, 이런 좋은 구운 고기는 집에서도 못 먹어봤을 거 아냐.”
하지만 그 사냥꾼은 먹으려하지 않았죠.
그러는 내내 산적들은 놀라며 병사를 쳐다보고 있었어요. 
산적들이 말했죠.
“체면이고 뭐고 없는 놈이구먼.”
잠시 후 그(병사)가 말했어요.
“배부르게 먹었느니, 이제 좀 마셔볼까.”
두목은 그의 기분을 맞춰주고 싶었던지 노파에게 말했어요.
“지하실로 가서 술 가져와봐, 최고급으로.”
병사가 큰 소리를 내며 마개를 뽑더니 술병을 들고 사냥꾼에게 가 말했어요.
“잘 봐둬요, 형씨, 내 이제부터 기똥찬 걸 보여줄 테니. 내가 이제부터 저 패거리들을 위해 건강을 기원하며 건배할 거거든.”
그럼 다음 그가 산적들 머리 위로 그 술병을 휘두르며 소리쳤어요.
“만수무강들 하슈, 자 입 벌리고 오른 손을 치켜든 채로.”
그런 다음 그가 거나하게 한 모금 마셨지요.
그 말이 내뱉어지자마자 산적들 모두가 앉은 채로 꼼짝달싹 못하고 말았지요. 그들의 입은 벌어진 채였고, 오른손들은 허공으로 치켜든 채였어요.
사냥꾼이 병사에게 말했어요.
“당신 이런 묘기도 부릴 줄 아시오, 여하튼 어서 여길 떠납시다.”
“오호, 형씨, 갈 때 가더라도, 도둑놈들은 잡고 가야할 거 아니오. 약탈품들도 차지해야하고 말이오. 저들이 너무 놀라 입을 벌린 채 꼼짝 못하고 있을 거요, 내가 허락을 해줄 때까진 말이오. 그건 그거고, 일단 와서 좀 마시고 드시구려.”
노파가 최고급 술로 한 병 더 가져와야했지요.
병사는 그렇게 앉아 삼일 치 식량을 해치울 때까지 꿈쩍도 하지 않았어요.
마침내 날이 밝자, 그가 말했어요.
“자 이제 텐트(천막)를 칠 시간이요, 이젠 노파가 도시로 가는 가장 가까운 길을 알려줄 테니 금방 갈 거요.”
그들은 그렇게 하여 도시에 도착했지요.
병사는 자신의 옛 전우(친구)들에게 가 말했어요.
“숲에 교수대의 새들로 가득한 둥지를 하나 발견했네, 나와 같이 가서 붙잡으세.”
병사는 전우들에게 길을 안내하며, 사냥꾼에게도 말했어요.
“산적들이 저들의 다리를 부여잡으며 비는 꼴을 보려면 당신도 따라 오시구려.”
병사는 전우들보고 산적들을 빙 둘러가며 포위하게 했지요. 그런 다음 병사는 그 술병을 들곤 한 모금 마시더니 산적들의 머리 위로 휘둘르며 소리쳤어요.
“다시 움직여.”
그 즉시 산적들이 힘을 회복했는데요, 하지만 그들은 즉각 제압당해 손발이 새끼줄에 묶이고 말았답니다.
그런 다음 그 병사는 산적들이 마치 수북한 자루인양 마차에 실어 나르게 했지요.
그가 말했어요. 
“자 그들을 곧장 감옥으로 데려가자고.”
하지만 사냥꾼은 그들 중 한 명을 따로 불러 뭔가 추가적인 지시를 내리는 거 같았어요.
“멋진 장화 신은 형씨,”라며 그 병사가 말했어요. “적들도 다 소탕하고 안전하게 보냈으니 우린 그냥 낙오병 마냥 저들 뒤에서 가만히 걷기만 하면 될 거요!”
그들이 도시에 접근할 때, 병사가 보니, 수많은 군중(사람들)들이 성문까지 나와 기쁨의 고함을 내지르며 허공(공중)에다 푸른(초록색) 나뭇가지들을 흔들고 있었어요.
게다가 호위대까지 출동한 게 병사의 눈에 띄었어요.
“이게 다 뭐지?”라며 그가 사냥꾼에게 말했어요. 
“모르겠소?”라며 사냥꾼이 말했어요. “저들은 지금 오랫동안 왕국을 비웠던 왕의 귀환을 환영하는 거요. 오늘 그가 돌아오는 날이거든. 모두가 왕을 맞을 준비를 하고 있지요.”
“하지만 왕이 어딨다고?”라며 병사가 말했어요. “내 눈엔 안 보이는데.”
“여기 있잖소.”라며 그 사냥꾼이 대답했어요. “내가 바로 그 왕이오. 미리 내 도착을 귀뜸해놓았지요.”
그가 입고 있던 ‘수렵복’(숲에서 총 쏠 때 입는 옷. 사냥복)을 펼쳐보이자 왕실 의상이 드러났어요.
병사는 깜짝 놀라 두 무릎을 꿇고 앉아 그동안 자신이 아무 것도 모르고 이름을 함부로 말하며 무례하게 군 것을 용서해달라고 빌었어요.
하지만 왕은 그와 악수를 하며 말했지요.
“당신은 용감한 군인이오, 내 목숨을 구해준 군인 말이오. 당신이 이제 부족하지 않게 내가 돌봐드리리다. 산적들의 소굴에서 먹었던 것처럼 좋은 구운 고기를 한 입 먹고 싶을 때면 왕실 부엌으로 오시구려. 하지만 술을 한 모금 마시고 싶을 땐, 꼭 내 허가를 먼저 구하고 마셔야하오.(사람들을 못 움직이게 하는 마법을 걸지 말라는 소리임)”
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「물소 가죽 장화」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「물소 가죽 장화」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter199.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



200. 황금 열쇠



추운 겨울 날, 땅 위로 깊은 눈이 쌓인 날, 한 가난한 소년이 어쩔 수 없이 썰매에 땔감을 주워 담은 다음 나르러 밖으로 나가야 했어요.
땔감을 다 모아 묶은 다음, 언 몸을 좀 녹였다 집에 가려고 소년이 모닥불을 하나 피울 요량으로, 눈을 헤쳤지요.
한참 땅을 치우다 그가 자그마한 황금 열쇠 하나를 발견했지 뭐예요.
그래서 소년은 열쇠가 있으니 당연히 자물쇠도 있겠구나 생각하고서 땅 속을 파보니 다행히도 철제 상자 하나가 나오지 뭐예요.
‘이제 열쇠만 맞으면!’라고 소년이 생각했지요. ‘이 예쁜 상자 안에 든 귀중품들을 가질 수 있겠네.’
하지만 소년이 아무리 살펴보아도 거기엔 열쇠구멍이 없지 뭐예요. 그러다 결국은 열쇠구멍 하나를 찾긴 찾았지만 너무 작아 눈으로도 거의 보이지 않지 뭐예요.  
소년이 끼워보니 열쇠가 열쇠구멍에 딱 들어맞았어요.
그런 다음 소년은 열쇠를 한 번 찰칵 하고 돌려보았어요.
자 그럼 이제 우리는 소년이 상자의 자물쇠를 완전히 풀고 뚜껑을 열 때까지 기다리면 되잖아요, 그럼 그 상자 안에 어떤 진기한 물품들이 들어앉아 있는지를 소년과 함께 알게 될 테니까요. 
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「황금 열쇠」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「황금 열쇠」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter200.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥









※ 알 림 ※

- 이후 201~210편은 “어린이를 위한 성자 이야기”입니다. 이도 또한 그림형제의 『그림동화집』에 포함되는 내용입니다. 경건한 종교적 얘기를 다루고 있습니다.



201. 숲 속의 성 요셉
(성 요셉은 ‘성모 마리아’의 남편이름입니다.)





옛날에 세 딸을 둔 엄마가 살고 있었어요.
첫째 딸은 무례하고 마음씨가 고약했어요. 둘째는 좀 나았지만 그래도 결점들이 있었죠. 하지만 막내딸은 참 신앙심이 깊고 착한 아이였답니다.
그렇지만, 엄마는 이상하게도 첫째 딸을 무척이나 사랑했고 막내딸을 견디지 못해하셨지요.
이 탓에 엄마는 불쌍한 막내를 종종 울창한 숲에 보냈어요. 길을 잃게 해 영영 집에 못 돌아오게 만들 작정이었거든요.
하지만 착한 아이들에겐 수호천사가 늘 있는 법, 그래서 그녀도 버려지지 않고 늘 올바른 길로 다시 돌아올 수 있었답니다.
하지만 한 번은 수호천사가 제때 오지 못했어요, 그래서 아이는 숲을 빠져나올 수가 없었어요.
그녀가 걷고 또 걸어 저녁이 될 때까지 걸으니 저 멀리서 희미한 불빛 하나가 밝혀있는 게 보여, 그리로 달려가 보니, 자그마한 오두막이 한 채 나왔어요.
그녀가 똑똑 노크를 하곤 문을 열고 들어가 보니, 두 번째 문이 나왔어요. 그래서 그녀가 다시 똑똑 노크를 했지요.
그때 눈처럼 흰 수염을 하고서 존경스러워 보이는 얼굴을 한 노인 한 분이 그녀에게 문을 열어주었어요. 그는 다름 아닌 ‘성 요셉’(성모 마리아의 남편이름)이었어요.
그가 아주 친절하게 말했어요.
“들어오거라, 얘야, 불가 옆 내 작은 의자에 앉아 몸을 녹이려무나. 네가 목이 마르다면 가서 깨끗한 물을 가져오마. 하지만 여긴 숲 속이라 네게 줄 음식이 어린 야채뿌리 두서넛 밖에 없구나, 이거라도 급한 대로 껍질을 까고 끊이려무나.”
성 요셉이 그녀에게 야채뿌리들을 줬어요.
소녀는 말끔히 껍질을 깎곤, 엄마가 그녀에게 챙겨준 팬케이크 한 조각과 빵도 함께 냄비에 넣고 몽땅 섞어 끓여 묵직한 죽을 만들었죠.
요리가 다 되자, 성 요셉이 말했어요.
“배가 고파 그러는데, 내게도 좀 주겠니.”
아이는 기꺼이 그리했어요. 그녀는 자기 몫보다 더 많이 그에게 죽을 들어 주었어요.
하지만 하느님이 도우사 그녀도 아주 배부르게 먹을 수 있었답니다.
식사를 마치자, 성 요셉이 말했어요.
“잘 시간이구나, 하지만 침대가 하나뿐이니, 네가 침대에 자거라. 나는 밀짚을 깔고 바닥에서 자마.”
“아니에요.”라며 그녀가 대답했어요. “침대에서 주무세요, 밀짚은 제가 사용해도 되요.”
하지만 성 요셉은 아이를 안아 작은 침대에 내려다주었지요.
거기서 그녀는 기도를 드리곤 잠이 들었어요.
다음날 아침 그녀가 깼을 때 성 요셉에게 아침인사를 하려고 보니 그가 보이지 않는 거예요.
그녀가 일어난 다음 그를 찾아보았지만 어디에도 없었어요.
그러다 결국 그녀는 문 뒤에 돈이 가득 든 자루 하나를 보게 되었죠. 어찌나 묵직한지 그녀도 간신히 옮길 수 있을 정도였어요. 거기에 “이것은 어젯밤 여기서 잔 아이의 것이다.”라는 문구가 적혀 있었어요.
그리하여 그녀가 자루를 들고 출발해 안전하게 엄마에게 도착했답니다. 그리곤 가져온 돈을 모두 엄마에게 드렸더니 엄마가 너무 기뻐하시지 뭐예요.
다음날 둘째도 숲에 가고 싶어졌어요.
엄마가 그녀에게 훨씬 더 큰 팬케이크 한 조각과 빵을 담아주었어요.
그녀에게도 여동생과 같은 일이 일어났답니다.
저녁 무렵 그녀가 성 요셉의 자그마한 오두막에 도착했지요.
그가 그녀에게 야채뿌리를 주자 그녀도 묵직한 죽을 끓였어요.
음식이 준비되자 그가 또한 그녀에게 말했어요.
“배가 고프구나, 내게도 좀 주겠니.”
그러자 아이가 말했어요.
“조금 들어드릴게요.”
그 후 성 요셉이 자신의 침대를 양보하며 자신은 밀짚위에서 자겠다고 말했어요.
그녀가 대답했지요.
“아니오, 침대에서 주무세요. 저희 둘이 자기에도 충분한 침대에요.”
성 요셉이 그녀를 안아 침대에 눕히곤 자신은 밀짚 위에서 잤어요.
아침이 되어 아이가 깨어나 성 요셉을 찾았지만 그는 사라진 이후였지요.
하지만 그녀는 문 뒤에서 돈이 든 주먹만 한 크기의 자루를 발견했어요.
거기에 “이건 어젯밤 여기서 잔 아이의 것이다.”라고 적혀 있었어요.
그래서 그녀가 그 작은 자루를 들고서 집으로 달려가 엄마에게 드렸어요. 하지만 그녀(둘째 딸)는 자기 몫으로 몰래 동전 두 개를 챙겼답니다.
이리되자 첫째 딸도 호기심이 생겨, 다음 날 아침 그녀도 숲으로 가겠다고 우겼어요.
엄마가 그녀에게 팬케이크를… 정말이지 양껏 담아주고, 덤으로 치즈를 바른 빵까지 챙겨주었어요.
저녁에 그녀도, 앞서 두 사람들처럼 성 요셉이 사는 자그마한 오두막을 발견했어요.
죽이 준비되자, 성 요셉이 말했어요.
“배가 고프구나, 내게도 좀 주겠니.”
소녀가 대답했어요.
“저부터 먼저 먹고 남으면 드릴게요.”
하지만 그녀는 거의 다 먹어버렸답니다.
그래서 성 요셉은 그릇 바닥을 끍다 시피하며 먹었어요.
그 후 착한 노인이 그녀에게 자신의 침대를 양보하며 자신은 밀짚 위에서 자겠다 말했어요.
그녀는 전혀 사양하지 않고 작은 침대로 가 눕곤, 백발이 ‘성성한’(=흰) 노인에겐 딱딱한 밀짚에서 자게 했어요.
다음날 아침 그녀가 깨었을 때 성 요셉은 보이지 않았지만, 그녀는 그런 것엔 관심도 주지 않았어요. 
그녀는 다짜고짜 문 뒤에 있을 돈 자루부터 찾았지요.
그녀는 바닥에 뭔가 있으리라 생각했어요, 하지만 그게 뭔지는 잘 구분이 안 돼서, 허리를 숙이고 찬찬히 들여다보는데, 순간 그게 그녀의 코에 달라붙기에, 그녀가 화들짝 몸을 펴고 들여다보니 놀랍게도 그건 또 하나의 코였어요. 코가 자신의 진자 코 위에 또 들어붙은 거지요.
그녀가 비명을 지르고 울고불고 생난리를 피웠지만 소용없었죠. 뭘 어떻게 해도 그게 코 위에서 보였으니까요. 왜냐면 앞으로 쑥 삐져나왔거든요.
그녀가 뛰쳐나와 쉬지 않고 앙앙 울다 마침내 성 요셉과 만났어요.
그녀가 무릎을 꿇고 앉아 “코를 다시 떼어주세요.”라며 싹싹 빌자, 그도 불쌍한 생각이 들어 그녀의 두 번째 코를 떼어주곤 심지어 동전도 2개 쥐어주었어요.
그녀가 집에 도착해서보니, 엄마가 집문 앞에까지 나와 기다리고 있다 물었지요.
“너에게 뭘 주던?”   
그러자 그녀가 거짓말을 했어요.
“큼직한 돈 자루. 그런데 오다 그만 잃어버렸어.”
“조심했어야지!”라며 엄마가 소리쳤어요. “오 아니다 우리가 다시 찾아보자구나.”
엄마는 그녀를 손으로 이끌며 그 돈 자루를 찾으러했어요.
처음엔 그녀도 울며 가지 않겠다했지만 어쩔 수 없이 따라가고 말았죠.
하지만 가는 도중, 수많은 도마뱀들과 뱀들이 별안간 그녀들에게 달려드는 바람에 그녀들이 걸음아 나 살려라 하며 도망갔지만, 도마뱀과 뱀들이 마음씨 고약한 딸아이를 결국 물어 죽였고 엄마 또한 자식을 잘못 키운 벌로 발을 물어버렸답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「숲 속의 성 요셉」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「숲 속의 성 요셉」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter201.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



202. 열두 사도



주 그리스도께서 태어나시기 3백 년 전에, 열 두 아들들을 둔 엄마가 살고 계셨어요. 그녀는 너무도 가난하여 더는 어떻게 아이들을 먹여살려야할 지를 몰랐답니다.
그녀는 매일같이 하느님께 기도했어요, 자신의 아이들이 예정된 구세주와 함께 할 수 있게 해달라고요.
하지만 그녀의 가난은 갈수록 심해졌고 기어이 그녀도 아이들 중 한 명을 차례대로 세상에 내놓게 되었답니다, 엄마를 위해 구걸을 해오라면서요.
장남의 이름은 베드로였어요. 밖으로 나온 그는 벌써 한 참을 걸었지요, 온종일 걸었지요, 그러다 큰 숲에 들어가게 되었어요.
빠져나갈 길을 찾았지만 쉽게 나오지 못했어요. 점점 더 깊게만 들어가는 걸요, 동시에 너무도 배가 고파 더는 서 있기조차 힘이 들었어요.
결국 그는 너무도 허약해져 드러누울 수밖에 없었어요. 이제 죽음이 멀지 않았다 속으로 믿었지요.
순간 그의 옆에 작은 소년이 화사하게 빛을 발하며 서 있는 거예요, 천사만큼이나 아름답고 우아해 보이는 소년이었어요.
아이가 작은 손으로 때리기에 베드로도 어쩔 수 없이 올려다 보다 그를 발견한 거였죠.
그때 아이가 말했어요.
“당신은 무슨 곤란을 겪으시기에 거기 앉아 계신가요?”
“아아!”라며 베드로가 대답했어요. “일용할 양식을 구하러 세상에 나가던 참이다, 그래야 예정된 구세주를 볼 수 있지 않겠느냐, 그게 내 가장 큰 소망이니라.”
아이가 말했어요.
“저를 따라 오십시오, 당신의 소망이 이루어지도록 하겠습니다.”
그가 가련한 베드로의 손을 부여잡고 낭떠러지 사이의 큰 동굴로 안내했어요.
거기 들어서니 모든 게 금빛 은빛 그리고 수정으로 빛나고 있었어요. 그 한 가운데엔 12개의 요람(아기침대)이 나란히 놓여 있었지요.
그때 작은 천사가 말하길,
“첫 번째 요람에 드시어, 잠시 주무십시오, 제가 당신을 흔들어드리겠나이다.”
베드로가 그리하자, 천사가 노래를 불러주며 그가 잠이 들 때까지 흔들어주었어요.
그가 잠이 들 무렵, 두 번째 형제가 수호천사의 인도를 받으며 또한 들어섰고, 그도 첫째 형과 마찬가지로 잠이 들 때까지 천사가 요람을 흔들어주었지요.
그렇게 한명씩 모두 열두 형제가 황금요람들에 누워 잠이 들 때까지 차례대로 찾아왔답니다.
하지만 그들은 구세주가 세상에 오신 날 밤까지 3백 년을 잠이 들었지요.
그런 다음 그들도 깨어났고, 그 분의 말씀을 지지해드렸지요. 그들을 열두 사도들이라 불렀답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「열두 사도」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「열두 사도」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter202.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



203. 장미



옛날에 두 아이를 둔 가난한 여인이 한 명 살고 있었어요.
막내(여자)는 매일 숲으로 가 땔감을 가져와야했답니다.
한번은 그 애(여자)가 땔나무를 줍기 위해 아주 멀리까지 가야했을 때, 아주 강하고 귀여운 어인아이가 한 명 오더니 자신(막내)을 도와 부지런히 땔나무를 주워도 주고 집까지 나르는 걸 도와도 주었는데 방금 전 그 낯선 아이가 사라졌다는 거예요.
아이는 자신의 엄마에게 이 얘기를 했지만, 엄마도 처음엔 믿질 않으려하셨죠.
한참 있다가 그녀(막내)가 장미 한 송이를 집에 들고 와 엄마에게 오늘 그 예쁜 어린아이가 자신에게 이 장미를 주었다고 말하며, 그 애(남자) 말로는 이 장미가 활짝 필 때 자신(남자)이 다시 돌아올 거라 그랬다는 거예요.
엄마가 그 장미를 물병에다 담가 두었어요.
어느 날 아침 아이가 침대에서 나오지 않아 엄마가 침대로 가보니 아이(막내여자애)는 죽어 있지 뭐예요. 하지만 그 애는 아주 행복한 표정을 짓고 있었어요.
같은 날 아침, 그 장미가 활짝 펴 있었답니다. (슬프네요.ㅠ_ㅠ 슬픈 내용인지 모르고 해석 시작했는데, 아침부터 슬퍼...)
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「장미」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「장미」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter203.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



204. 가난과 겸손이 천국으로 이끄나니



옛날에 한번은, 세상으로 나간 왕자가 생각과 슬픔으로 가득했어요.
물론 그가 올려다본 하늘은 순수하고 푸르게도 아름다웠지만 그는 한 숨을 내쉬며 말했답니다.
“저 위 천국에 갈 수 있으면 좋으련만!”
그때 그의 눈에 가난한 백발노인이 그쪽으로 다가오는 게 보여 그 노인을 불러 물어봤지요.
“어떻게 하면 천국에 갈 수 있습니까?”
그 남작 대답하길,
“가난하고 겸손하게 살게나. 내 구더기 옷을 입고, 7년 동안 세상을 방랑하며 세상의 비참함을 배우게나, 다만 돈을 가지고 가지 말게, 배고프면 동정심 있는 사람들에게 빵을 조금 얻게나. 이런 식으로 하면 천국에 다다를 수 있을 걸세.”
그래서 왕자는 자신의 화려한 옷을 벗고 대신 거지 옷을 걸치곤 세상으로 나가 고통을 감내하며 살았습니다.
그는 약간의 음식 외에는 먹지 않았고, 말도 전혀 하지 않았고, 다만 자신을 천국에 데려가 달라고 하느님께 기도 드렸죠.
7년이 끝이 나자, 그는 아빠의 궁전으로 돌아왔지만, 아무도 그를 알아보지 못했어요.
그가 하인들에게 말했어요.
“가서 내 부모님께 내가 돌아왔다 이르거라.”
하지만 하인들은 그 말을 믿지 않고 그를 비웃으며 서 있게 만들었죠.
그가 이번엔 이렇게 말했어요.
“가서 내 형제들에게 아래로 내려와 달라 이르거라, 그들을 다시 보고 싶구나.”
하인들은 이번에도 그리 하지 않으려 들었어요. 다만 그러다 한 명이 가서 왕자들에게 이 말을 전했지만 왕자들 누구도 그 말을 믿지 않았어요, 그래서 아무도 이 거지에게 신경도 쓰지 않았죠.
그래서 그가 자기 엄마에게 편지 한 통을 적어, 그동안 자신이 비참하게 산 것을 모두 설명했어요. 다만 편지엔 자신이 그녀의 아들이란 말만은 하지 않았지요.
그리하여 동정심이 인 왕비가 그에게 계단 아래 방에 머물 수 있게 해주고 두 하인을 통해 매일 음식을 전달해주게 했어요.
하지만 두 하인 중 한 명은 심술궂은 자라 이렇게 말했지요.
“거지에게 뭐 이런 좋은 음식을 줘야 한담?”
그래서 그는 그 음식을 자기가 먹거나 아님 개들에게 주거나하고, 아파서 쇠약해진 거지에겐 물만 전달해주었지요.
반편 다른 하인 한 명은 정직했기에 전달받은 음식들을 거지에게 꼬박꼬박 전해주었답니다.
가엾지만 그는 그 음식으로라도 잠시 먹고 살 수 있었어요. 모든 시간 그는 참으로 참을성 있었어요, 하지만 점점 쇠약해져만 가는 건 막을 수 없었죠.
하지만 병이 더 심해지자 그는 ‘병자성사’(=종부성사. 죽을 위험에 처한 신자가 마지막에 받는 성사)를 진실로 받고 싶어 했지요. 
주인이 아래로 내려갔을 때, 그 마을과 이웃마을에 있던 모든 종들이 울리기 시작했어요.
목사님이 모임을 마치고 계단 아래 그 가난한 자에게 갔을 때는 이미 그는 숨을 거둔 이후였답니다.
그의 한 손엔 장미 한 송이가, 다른 손에는 백합 한 송이가 쥐어져 있었지요. 그리고 그의 옆에는 자신의 삶을 적은 종이 한 장이 놓여 있었지요.
그가 땅에 묻혔을 때, 그의 무덤 한쪽 편에서 장미 한 송이가 피어났고, 다른 쪽 편에선 백합 한 송이가 피어났답니다. 
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「가난과 겸손이 천국으로 이끄나니」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「가난과 겸손이 천국으로 이끄나니」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter204.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



205. 하느님의 음식
(줄거리 : 이 동화는 가난한 과부와 자녀들이 기도를 드린 후 죽었다는 내용입니다. 부담되시면 안 읽으셔도 됩니다. 제목이 좋아 내용을 오해하실 수 있어 미리 말씀드립니다.)





옛날 옛적에 두 자매가 살았어요.
둘 중 한명의 자매는 아이가 없고 부자였어요. 
다른 자매는 자녀가 다섯이나 있는 과부였고 너무도 가난하여 자신과 아이들의 끼니를 해결할 거리가 더는 없었어요.
그리하여 어려움에 처한 그녀가 자매에게 가 말했어요.
“내 아이들과 내가 지금 너무도 배가 고파 고통받아있어. 너는 부자니 빵 한 덩어리만 주려무나.”
부자 자매는 돌처럼 인정머리 없는 사람인지라 이렇게 말했어요.
“집에 우리 먹을 거도 없어.”
그러면서 부자 자매는 모진 말까지 해가며 가난한 여인을 쫓아내버렸어요. 
얼마 후, 부자 자매의 남편이 집으로 돌아와 먹으려고 막 빵을 한 조각 쓸었더니 첫 칼질을 한 빵에서 붉은 피가 콸콸 흘러나오지 않겠어요.
여자가 이것을 보고 화들짝 놀라 오늘 무슨 일이 있었는지를 남편에게 알려주었지요.
남자가 과부와 아이들을 도우려 허겁지겁 뛰어갔어요.
그가 방에 들어서보니, 그녀는 기도 중이었어요.
그녀는 두 팔에 두 어린 아이들을 안고 있었고, 그 애들보다 나이 많은 세 자녀들은 이미 숨을 거둬 바닥에 누워 있었지요.
그가 황급히 그녀에게 음식을 들이밀며 드시라 했지만, 그녀는 이렇게 대답하기만 했어요.
“지상의 음식은 더는 저희의 소망이 아니옵니다. 하느님께서는 벌써 굶주린 저희 셋을 받아주셨지요, 이제 남은 저희의 기도들에도 마찬가지로 귀 기울여주실 겁니다.”
그녀가 이 말을 내뱉자마자 두 어린 자녀들이 마지막 숨을 거두었고, 그와 동시에 그녀 또한 억장이 무너져 맥없이 쓰러지며 죽고 말았답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「하느님의 음식」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「하느님의 음식」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter205.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



206. 푸른 나뭇가지 세 개



산기슭 숲에 살며 대부분의 시간을 기도와 선한 일로 보내며 매일 저녁이 되면 하느님께 영광을 돌리며 물 두 통을 떠서 산으로 올라가는 은둔자가 한 명 있었어요.
그 물로 그는 산 정상에 사는 짐승과 많은 식물에게 물을 주었지요.
계속해서 부는 강풍 탓에 공기와 땅이 메마른 곳이었고, 인간의 무서운 마차바퀴가 지나가면 야생의 새들이 물이 떨어지지 않나 눈을 부라리고 날아드는 곳이었지요.
그 은둔자는 너무도 신앙심이 깊었기에, 하느님이 보낸 천사도 볼 수 있었답니다.
그가 하루 일과를 마치면 천사가 음식을 가져다주었답니다. 마치 하느님의 명을 받은 큰까마귀가 옛날에 예언자에게 먹을 것을 주었던 것처럼요.
경건하던 은둔자도 이제 고령의 나이에 도달하게 되었지요. 
그러다 한 번은 저 멀찍이에서 불쌍한 죄수 한 명이 교수대를 지고 가는 게 보이지 않겠어요.
그가 부주의하게도 이렇게 혼자 말했답니다.
“그래, 마땅히 받아야 할 벌을 받는 거지!”
저녁이 되자, 그는 물통을 들고 산 위로 올라갔어요. 그런데 늘 그와 함께 하던 천사가 어인 일로 그 날은 음식을 가져다주지 않았어요.
그래서 그가 놀라 마음을 되씹어보며 자신이 오늘 무슨 죄를 지어 하느님을 노엽게 하지 않았나 생각해보았지만 알 길이 없었어요.
그래서 그는 먹지도 마시지도 않고 몸을 바닥에 내던지며 밤낮으로 기도를 드렸지요.
하루는 그가 숲속에서 통렬히 울고 있는데, 작은 새가 아름답고 기쁜 소리로 노래하는 게 들렸어요.
그래서 고뇌에 쌓여 있던 그가 말했어요.
“너는 참 기쁘게도 노래하는데, 하느님께선 네겐 노여워하지 않는 구나. 아, 너라도 내게, 내가 왜 그 분을 노엽게 했는지 말을 해줄 수 있다면 내가 속죄하련만, 그럼 내 마음이 다시 기쁠 것을.”
그러자 그 새가 말을 하기 시작하더니 이렇게 얘기했어요.
“당신은 부당한 짓을 했답니다. 교수대를 이고 가는 불쌍한 죄수를 보고 비난하셨잖아요, 그래서 하느님이 당신께 노여워하신 거랍니다. 판정은 그 분만이 하시는 거예요. 하지만, 당신이 속죄하고 죄를 회개하신다면, 그분께서도 용서해주실 거예요.”
그때 천사가 손에 마른 나뭇가지를 쥐고 옆에 서며 말했어요.
“이 마른 나뭇가지가 푸른 나뭇가지 세 개를 피울 때까지 가지고 다니세요. 밤에 잘 때도 머리에 베고 주무세요. 당신은 이집 저집을 다니며 음식을 구걸하시고, 같은 집에서 하룻밤 이상 머물러선 안 돼요. 이것이 하느님이 당신께 내린 속죄의 방법이랍니다.”
그래서 은둔자가 그 나무 가지를 들고 오랫동안 떠나왔던 세상으로 다시 내려갔어요.
그는 문에서 얻은 것 외엔 먹지도 마시지도 않았어요.
하지만 그의 진정성은 잘 받아들여지지 않았어요. 수많은 문들이 그에게 닫힌 채였고요, 그래서 그는 자주 빵부스러기 하나도 구걸할 수 없었답니다.
그가 아침부터 밤까지 이집 저집을 돌아다니며 구걸해도 아무도 그에게 먹을 걸 주지 않고 아무도 그를 밤에 재우려하지 않았을 때, 그는 숲으로 와야 했어요. 그러다 마침내 누군가가 만든 동굴을 발견했는데, 한 노파가 안에 앉아 있었죠.
그가 말했어요.
“선하신 여인이여, 오늘 밤 당신의 집에서 묵게 해주십시오.”
하지만 그녀는 말했어요.
“아니, 안 됩니다, 그럴 수 없어요. 제겐 세 아들이 있는데 하나 같이 사악하고 사납지요. 강도짓을 하러 나간 그 애들이 돌아와 당신을 보면 우리 둘 다 죽이려들 거예요.”
은둔자가 말했어요.
“머물게 해주십시오. 그들은 당신이나 저나 해코지하지 못할 겝니다.”
여자는 불쌍한 마음이 들어 머물게 해주었어요.
글래서 남자는 계단 아래에 드러눕곤 나무 가지를 머리 아래에 베었답니다(베개로 하다).
그것을 본 노파가 이유를 물었지요.
그는 교수대를 이고 가는 불쌍한 죄수를 보고 “받아야 할 벌을 받는 게지!”라는 말을 해 하느님을 노엽게 한 결과, 이후 속죄의 의미로 이 나뭇가지를 가지고 다니며 밤에 베고 잔다는 얘기를 했어요.
그러자 그 여자가 울며 소리쳤어요.
“말 한 마디에도 하느님의 벌을 받는데, 우리 아들들이 그 분 앞에 가게 될 땐 어이할꼬?” 
밤12시가 되자 강도들이 집으로 돌아와 사납게 날뛰었어요.
그들이 불을 때자(피우자) 동굴 안이 환해지며 계단 아래에 웬 남자가 누워 있는 게 보였어요. 그들이 길길이 날뛰며 엄마에게 고함쳤어요.
“이 자는 누구에요? 아무도 들이지 말라 했잖아요?”
그러자 엄마가 말했어요.
“그를 그냥 두어라. 죄를 짓고 속죄 중인 불쌍한 죄인이란다.” 
강도들이 물었어요.
“그가 무슨 죄를 지었는데요?”
“노인 양반,”라며 그들이 불렀어요. “당신이 지은 죄를 말해보세요.”
노인이 일어나더니 그가 말 한 마디 잘못해 하느님의 노여움을 사 죄를 지은 것과 이후 자신의 죄를 속죄하게 된 얘기를 들려주었어요.
강도들은 이 얘기에 마음이 요동치는 격한 감동을 받은 나머지 자신들의 삶을 뒤돌아보았다 그만 충격을 받아 반성하고 후회하며 속죄하기 시작했어요.
세 명의 죄인들이 개과천선한 후 은둔자는 다시 계단 아래에 드러누워 잠이 들었답니다.
하지만 아침에 그들은 그가 죽은 걸 발견했지요. 그가 머리에 베고 있던 마른 나뭇가지에서 푸른 나뭇가지 세 개가 높게 자라 있었어요.
이렇게 하느님께서는 은혜를 베푸시어 그를 다시 받아들이셨답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「푸른 나뭇가지 세 개」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「푸른 나뭇가지 세 개」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter206.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



207. 성모 마리아의 작은 잔



옛날에 한 번은 마부가 포도주를 잔득 실은 ‘달구지’(바퀴 2개인 짐마차)를 끌고 가다 그만 속도를 너무 내는 바람에 빠져 온갖 노력에도 불구하고 오도 가도 못하는 상황에 빠지고 말았어요.
그때 때마침 그 길을 지나가시던 성모 마리아께서 이 불쌍한 사나이의 처지를 아시고 말하셨지요.
“제가 지치고 목이 좀 마릅니다. 제게 포도주 한 잔만 주시면, 제가 당신을 위해 그 달구지가 움직이게 해드리겠습니다.”
“기꺼이요.”라며 마부가 대답했어요. “하지만 이럴 어쩐다, 포도주를 담아드릴 잔이 없는데요.” 
그러자 성모 마리아께서 빨간 줄무늬들이 있는 예쁜 흰 꽃 하나를 꺾어서 마부에게 건넸어요. 그 꽃은 ‘서양메꽃’(사진링크 ▶ https://goo.gl/KC0LzH )라 불리는 꽃으로 잔과 아주 흡사하게 생긴 꽃이었지요.
마부가 그 잔에 포도주를 가득 담아 드렸더니 성모 마리아님께서 맛있게 마시셨어요. 그리고 그와 동시에 달구지도 다시 움직여 마부가 계속 몰고 갈 수 있게 되었지요.
그 작은 꽃은 이후 ‘성모 마리아의 작은 잔’으로 불리게 되었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「성모 마리아의 작은 잔」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「성모 마리아의 작은 잔」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter207.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



208. 나이 드신 어머님



어느 커다란 도시에 나이 드신 어머님 한 분이 자신의 방에 저녁 내내 앉아 그동안 떠나보낸 자신의 남편과 두 아이를 생각하고 있었어요. 그런 다음엔 자신의 모든 친척들도 한 사람씩 떠올려보았고 이제 막 그녀 곁을 떠난 자신의 마지막 친구 생각까지 닿자 그만 밤을 꼬박 새웠거니와 홀로된 느낌에 너무도 적절했지요.
그녀의 상심은 이만 저만이 아니었지요. 그 중 제일은 자신의 두 아들들을 잃었을 때의 상심이었어요.
결국 그녀가 스스로의 고통에 상심하다 하느님을 비난하기에 이르렀어요.
그녀가 사색(생각)에 잠겨 그렇게 앉아 있는데, 갑자기 새벽 기도 시간을 알리는 종소리들이 들려왔어요.
자신이 슬픔에 잠겨 날밤을 꼬박 새운 사실을 알고 놀란 그녀가 자신의 등불(손전등)을 켜고 교회로 기도하러 갔어요.
그녀가 도착해보니 교회는, 평소와 같이 양초들로 밝혀져 있는 게 아니라, 어떤 은은한 불빛으로 환히 밝혀져 있었지요.
사람들도 벌써 가득 차 있었고, 좌석(의자)들도 꽉 차 있었어요.
나이 드신 어머님이 평소 앉으시는 좌석에도 이미 누가 앉아 있었거니와 긴 의자들 전부가 사람들로 꽉 들어차 있었지요.  
그녀가 그 사람들을 살펴보니 그들은 죄다 다름 아닌 바로 그녀의 죽은 친척들이었어요. 죽은 친척들이 유행에 뒤진 옷들을 입고서 거기 앉아 있었던 거예요. 창백한 얼굴들을 하고서 말이죠.
그들(죽은 친척들)은 말을 하지도 그렇다고 노래를 부르지도 않았죠. 다만 보드라운 웅얼거림과 속삭이는 듯한 소리만 교회 전체에 울리고 있었지요.
그때 그녀의 이모 한 분이 자리에서 일어나 한 걸음 다가오시더니 나이 들고 가련한 어머님께 말했어요.
“저기 ‘성찬대’(=제단=교회탁자) 옆을 보거라, 그럼 네 아들들이 보일 게다.”
나이 드신 어머님께서 거길 보니 정말 자신의 두 아들들이 보였어요, 그런데 한 명은 교수대에 목이 매달려 있었고, 다른 한 명은 바퀴에 묶여 (회전하고) 있었어요.
그때 이모가 재차 말씀하셨지요.
“보거라, 만약 저들이 지금껏 살아있고, 선하신 하느님께서 그들이 아주 순진하던 때에 데려가시지 않으셨다면, 저들은 저리되고 말았을 거란다.”
떨면서 집으로 돌아온 나이 드신 어머님이 두 무릎을 꿇고 앉아, 자신이 이해할 수 있었던 것보다 훨씬 더 자애롭게 자신(어머니)을 ‘대해주신’(다루어주신) 하느님께 감사를 드렸어요.
그리고 3일째 되는 날 그녀는 자리에 누워 숨을 거두었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「나이 드신 어머님」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「나이 드신 어머님」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter208.html 

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



209. 하늘나라의 결혼 잔치



가난한 시골 소년이 어느 날 교회에서 목사님이 “하늘나라 왕국에 들어가길 원하는 자는 항상 똑바로 가야합니다.”라는 말을 들었어요.
그래서 그는 길을 떠나 언덕이 나오든 골짜기가 나오든 비켜가지 않고 계속해서 앞으로만 나아갔지요.
마침내 그가 큰 도시에 도착했는데, 그 한 복판에 교회가 있는 거예요. 때마침 예배가 한 참 진행 중이었지요.
그가 보니 웅장하기가 이럴 때 없는 게 정말로 천국에 도착했다 여기곤 자리에 앉아 진심 기뻐하고 있었답니다.
예배가 끝이 나고 집사가 소년보고 나가라 명령했을 때, 소년이 대꾸했지요.
“아니요, 다시 나가지 않을 거예요, 어떻게 오게 된 천국인데요.”
그래서 집사는 목사에게 가, “자신이 교회에 와 있다 믿는 나머지 두 번 다시 교회에서 나가지 않으려는 아이가 있습니다.”라고 말했지요.
목사가 말했어요.
“그 애가 그리 믿는다면, 두십시오.”
그래서 목사는 소년에게 가 일할 용의가 있는지를 물었어요.
“네,”라며 어린 아이가 대꾸했어요. “저는 일에 익숙해요, 천국에서 나가지만 않게 해준다면요.”
그리하여 소년은 그 교회에 머물게 되었답니다.
소년은, 사람들이 나무로 조각한, 행복한 아기 예수님과 함께 있는 성모 마리아 상에 와 무릎을 꿇고 기도하는 것을 보게 되었어요.
소년이 생각했어요.
“저분이 선하신 하느님이시구나.”
그래서 말했지요.
“안녕하세요 하느님, 그런데 왜 이리 마르셨어요! 사람들이 기도만 하고 당신을 굶기시나 봐요. 그럼 제가 매일 제 식사의 반을 당신께 드릴게요.”
이때부터 소년은 자기 몫의 식사 절반을 매일 성모 마리아 상에 갔다 주기 시작했고 성모 마리아께서도 그 음식을 맛있게 드시기 시작했답니다.
몇 주 지나자, 성모 마리아 상이 몰라보게 커지고 통통해지고 강해진 것처럼 보여 사람들이 깜작 놀랐어요.
이 현상을 이해할 수 없었던 목사는 교회에 머물며 어린 소년을 뒤따라가 보았죠. 그러자 소년이 자신의 식사를 성모 마리아님께 나누어주고 그녀 또한 그걸 맛있게 드시는 게 아니겠어요.
얼마 후 소년이 아프기 시작했어요. 그러다 8일을 침대에서 일어날 수 없게 되었지요.
하지만 소년은 곧 자리에서 일어날 수 있었고, 그러자마자 그가 제일 먼저 한 일은 자신의 음식을 성모 마리아께 드리는 거였어요.
목사가 소년을 따라갔다 소년이 이렇게 말하는 것을 들었어요.
“사랑하는 하느님, 오랫동안 뭐라도 가져다드리지 못한 저를 나쁘게 생각지 말아주세요. 제가 아파서 일어날 수 없었거든요.”
그러자 성모 마리아 상이 그에게 대답하며 말했어요.
“네 선한 호의를 이미 보았으니 그걸로 족하다. 다음 주 일요일 너는 나와 함께 결혼식에 가게 되리라.”
이 말에 소년이 뛸 듯이 기뻐 목사에게 가 그대로 말씀드렸어요.
목사가 소년에게 부탁해, 자신(목사)도 같이 가는 게 허락될 수 있느냐고 여쭈게 했지요.
“아니다,”라는 대답이 돌아왔어요. “너 혼자만이니라.”
목사는 소년을 우선 준비시키고 싶어 소년에게 ‘성찬식’(빵과 포도주를 조금 먹임)을 해주고 싶었어요. 
아이도 기꺼이 그에 응했답니다.
다음날 일요일 ‘성체’(성찬식의 빵. 예수님의 살을 상징)가 소년에게 닿자, 소년이 쓰러져 죽었어요. 그리하여 소년은 영원히 변치 않는 결혼식에 있게 되었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「하늘나라의 결혼 잔치」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「하늘나라의 결혼 잔치」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter209.html

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥



210. 개암나무 가지



어느 날 오후에 아기 예수가 아기침대에 누워 잠을 자고 있었답니다.
그때 그의 어머니께서 오시더니 기쁨 가득한 얼굴로 말했어요.
“잘 자고 있으렴, 얘야? 곤히 자고 있음, 그 사이 내가 숲으로 가 산딸기를 한 움큼 가져오마. 그럼 네가 깨었을 때 그 산딸기로 맛있게 배를 채울 수 있을 거란다.”
더할 나위 없이 맛있는 산딸기를 그녀는 숲 외곽에서 발견했지요.
그녀가 막 허리를 숙여 산딸기 하나를 따려는데, 불쑥 독사(독이 있는 뱀) 한 마리가 풀 밖으로 튀어나오지 뭐예요. 
그녀가 깜짝 놀라 산딸기들을 그 자리에 두고 황급히 자리를 떴어요.
독사가 그녀를 뒤쫓아 왔어요.
하지만 우리의 성모 마리아께서는 독사를 어찌 대처해야하는지를 잘 알고 계셨답니다.
그녀는 개암나무 가지 뒤로 몸을 숨기고선, 독사가 다시 물러갈 때까지 서 있었지요.
그런 다음 그녀가 산딸기들을 따고 나서 집으로 향하며 말했지요.
“이번에 개암나무 가지가 나를 지켜주었듯, 앞으론 다른 이들도 역시 지켜 주리라.”
그런 까닭에, 아주 오랜 옛날부터, ‘싱싱하게 푸른’(초록색인) 개암나무 가지는 독사나 뱀과 같이 땅 위를 기어 다니는 그 밖의 모든 것들로부터 우리를 지켜주는 가장 안전한 보호자가 되어주었답니다.
 
(동화 끝)

동화 「개암나무 가지」의 끝

※ 위의 동화는, 아래링크의 영어동화를 우리말로 해석한 것입니다. 

「개암나무 가지」  ▶ https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/g/grimm/g86h/chapter210.html

읽어주셔서 감사합니다~♥


그림형제 『동화집』 전체 끝
이상으로 우리말 옮김을 모두 마칩니다. 읽어주셔서 감사합니다.
행복한 하루 되세요~ ;)